The graphic disparity between Watch Dogs' reveal trailer and yesterday's story trailer have been an extremely hot topic. Online communities are filled with discussions about the game's graphics being “downgraded” and we're seeing reports of Ubisoft's PR working to handle the immense backlash.

One such Ubisoft PR person is Tessa Vilyn, Ubisoft Benelux PR and events manager. Due to her comments supporting the game's visuals, she has become a target for questions from the distraught community looking for answers.

Her initial tweet about the matter is as follows, “Bit bummed about some people not liking the graphics of the #Watchdogs trailer! I saw the game guys and it looks INCREDIBLE! #promise”

When faced with a tweet asking her if the graphics have been toned down since the E3 reveal, she responded by saying that such a thing is “impossible”.

“it is impossible, of couse [sic] it is not downgraded at all. :),” she wrote.

“i love graphics, its because i know they look good i'm bummed they think differently about it.[...] its a true next gen game for sure... for sure.. “

Tessa states that she's played the latest demo of the game and that reactions are too harsh and lack the hands-on experience that she had had with the game.

“Believe me the game is not downgraded, that would just be a bit ridiculous. :) … Again this is my opinion based on what i saw when playing the latest demo.”

One such comparison that's making the rounds is the one that I have embedded below. It shows footage of a car chase from Watch Dogs footage in 2012 and footage from the latest trailer. The lighting effects shown are not very comparable.

In a Eurogamer interview with Watch Dogs' creative director, Jonathan Morin, posted yesterday, Morin stated that despite the game's delay to improve functionality of gameplay mechanics, the game will not look like the game's reveal trailer.

"Are we delivering the 'movie [style vision] of every single person on Earth who saw that [The Games Reveal Trailer]? Probably not, that's not possible. But are we delivering on this fantasy of being a hacker, controlling everything and approaching things in different ways – yes,” said Morin.

Last year, Morin told VideoGamer that there would be no visual downgrade from the game's reveal to retail state. "There's no scale down in quality, especially the next-gen versions," Morin told VideoGmer in September. "It's pretty much the opposite. What we showed at E3 2012 in a lot of respects was less good. I think it's in the details. So no, there's no scale down."

Watch Dogs Delay: Game Delayed to Tend to "Important Details", Will Not Look As Good As E3 2012 Reveal

Honestly, the backlash toward the game's graphics seems a bit excessive - especially when it's driving people to toss vitriol towards Vilyn, someone that had no hand in the game's development or the latest trailer. Watch Dog's still looks like a good game, even if the graphics have been downgraded, but there are many prospective buyers out there that want answers, and the only material that they have are comparisons comprised of media coverage footage and trailers.

Ubisoft is going to have to release some official comparison shots and or footage, or a statement if they want to nip this backlash in the bud.