On April 18th the Arizona Coyotes received disappointing news as they received the third overall pick in this year’s draft from the results of the 2015 NHL Draft Lottery. Finishing 29th in the entire league behind the Buffalo Sabres, the Coyotes had a good chance at landing a first or second overall selection. Unfortunately the Edmonton Oilers came out on top, pushing Buffalo to second and Arizona to third.

The Arizona Coyotes will miss out on Connor McDavid and Jack Eichel this year but all is not lost. This team will receive a young skilled player with their pick but the question on everyone’s mind is who that is going to be. After McDavid and Eichel are selected there will be a handful of players that could easily fill that number three slot.

Do the Coyotes fill the defensive hole left after the departure of Keith Yandle? Do they tackle their lackluster scoring problem that haunted them this season? Do they trade their pick? There are many questions that can be answered with their pick on June 26th so we will have to wait and see.

The three main names left on the draft board will be Noah Hanifin, Dylan Strome, and Mitch Marner after Edmonton and Buffalo make their selections. Each of these players have a different skill set that could benefit the Arizona Coyotes in many different ways and will help in the overall goal of bringing the Stanley Cup to the desert.

With that being said, Howlin’ Hockey wants to hear from YOU! With the third overall selection in the 2015 NHL Draft, who would YOU select to join the Arizona Coyotes?

Here’s the rundown:

Position: Defenseman Games Played: 37 Goals: 5 Assists: 18 Points: 23

Noah Hanifin is regarded as the number one defensive player coming into the 2015 NHL Draft and projected to be taken third overall. Hanifin is a unique combination of physicality and mentality as he puts his body and mind to the test with each shift. He has a natural skating ability that compliments both his offensive and defensive style of play. Not only can his 6’3″ and 203 pound body eliminate players from the puck, he can also set his teammates up in a position to score.

As a freshman at Boston College, Noah Hanifin was a prominent member on the Eagles’ power-play and penalty kill. Scouts praise his ability to run the point and protect the blue line every time he steps on the ice. Noah describes his style as that of an offensive defenseman and models his skills by studying the playing styles of Duncan Keith and Drew Doughty.

Boston College coach Jerry York praised Hanifin on NHL.com by stating:

“We’re extremely pleased that not only is he a very good hockey player but he’s an outstanding teammate. He’s respected in the locker room because of his work habits and humble nature. He’s got a lot of qualities going for him besides his ability to play hockey and that makes it more enjoyable to have him around every day. Clearly his skating ability is at the NHL level right now and his puck handling and skills are excellent. He just needs to be little more assertive in the defensive zone but that will come with time.”

The biggest question with Noah Hanifin is whether or not the Arizona Coyotes feel the need to tackle their defensive problems with another young player. While an Oliver Ekman-Larsson and Noah Hanifin pairing could take the league by storm in a few seasons, it may not be essential with larger problems at hand.

The Arizona Coyotes tallied only 170 goals this season which places them 29th in the league in that category. Offense seems to be an issue for Arizona so passing on Hanifin may be an option on June 26th.

Position: Center Games Played: 68 Goals: 45 Assists: 84 Points:129

Dylan Strome is a pure playmaker that is ready to step up and play at the next level. Strome lead the entire Ontario Hockey League with 129 points this season, proving that he can light up the score sheet. Dylan has a strong knowledge of the ice and an alert vision which ultimately led him to the lead the league in assists with 84. His offensive awareness is top notch and he enjoys having the puck on his stick.

When asked about who he looks up to, Strome mentions Joe Thornton due to his soft hands and physicality. Dylan is very beneficial to his team in the faceoff circle as he wins a vast majority of draws. Dylan comes from a hockey family as well with his brother Ryan Strome currently playing for the New York Islanders. Strome’s knowledge is a key component in his high draft stock.

There are a few criticisms pertaining to the OHL’s leading scorer. Playing alongside Connor McDavid can easily make someone better and that has definitely been the case for Dylan Strome. With that being said, critics are wondering how Strome will perform without McDavid on his line. Well, without McDavid in the lineup Strome put up 35 points in 21 games. Playing without McDavid does not seem to be a problem.

Steve Kournianos of The Draft Analyst had this to say about Dylan:

“Strome’s elite play with the puck and the way he protects it can make attempts at slowing him down both futile and nightmarish. He’s a hard match up who can carve up any game plan with precision puck movement. He’s excellent at creating plays off the rush, but he also excels when the game is tightly checked and every lane is seemingly clogged. It is in the offensive zone where he uses his size, reach and elite vision to his advantage. He’s is a precise passer and gifted playmaker who epitomizes opportunistic; make a bad decision with him on the ice, and there’s a good chance you’re going pay for it.”

Is Dylan Strome the answer to Arizona’s scoring problem? Having the leading scorer of the OHL would certainly be a great starting point in the Coyotes rebuild. The probability of Strome playing in the NHL next season is low as it seems like he may need to sharpen his skills a little bit more with Erie. With that being said, having a superstar playmaker to set up players like Mikkel Boedker and Max Domi will be a huge threat in the future. His offensive awareness would be something that the Coyotes desperately need.

Position: Right Wing Games Played: 63 Goals: 44 Assists: 82 Points: 126

Mitch Marner has slowly climbed up the draft ladder as he was not expected to be a third overall pick at the beginning of the season. Marner has proved that he has what it takes to compete at the next level with his prolific offensive performance with London this year. Mitch would finish second behind Dylan Strome for the OHL scoring title at 126 points. Mitch is also the first player in London to reach a 100 point season since John Tavares in 2008.

Mitch Marner makes scoring look easy with his speed and ability to control the puck. He enjoys having the puck on his stick when entering the offensive zone in order to snipe one past the goaltender. Mitch is also recognized as a relentless forechecker and attacker. Marner compares himself to Patrick Kane of the Chicago Blackhawks and tries to model his game after him.

One of the reasons that a few analysts would pass on Mitch Marner would be due to his size. He is 5’11” and 160 pounds which isn’t necessarily ideal in the NHL. On the other hand, many players already in the league have a size limitation and that does not stop them. Tyler Johnson of the Tampa Bay Lightning currently leads the 2015 NHL Playoffs with 21 points at only 5’9″ and 175 pounds. Patrick Kane is a close second with 20 points in the playoffs at 5’11”. Size does not matter if you know how to use it and Mitch Marner certainly knows how to use his. There is a high possibility that he will hit another growth spurt before the year is over too.

Curtis Joe of EliteProspects describes Mitch Marner as:

“A dynamic offensive forward that backchecks hard and establishes his presence through playing smart, puck-possession hockey. A very quick skater gifted with great hands and hockey sense. Battles hard in all three zones and shows a willingness to do whatever it takes to get the puck to the back of the net; an unselfish player. Embodies the definition of a dynamic number-generating machine who makes the players around him better.”

The Arizona Coyotes could use a guy of Marner’s caliber on their team. Marner is a pure goal scorer that lets his presence be known with each shift he takes. Size does not limit him as he can be physical with anyone he is put up against. Drafting Marner will be beneficial to the Coyotes in terms of team chemistry as well. His junior hockey teammates Max Domi and Christian Dvorak have already been drafted by the Arizona Coyotes organization. Having three guys that all played in London together would definitely help their transition from the OHL to the NHL. Mitch Marner will aid in the Coyotes goal production if given the opportunity.

Now it’s time to let your voice be heard! There is the defensive talents of a Duncan Keith style player in Noah Hanifin, a playmaking Joe Thornton caliber player in Dylan Strome, and then a Patrick Kane influenced player in Mitch Marner. Who would you like the Arizona Coyotes to draft with the third overall pick in the 2015 NHL Draft?

Who should the Arizona Coyotes draft with the third overall pick? Noah Hanifin

Dylan Strome

Mitch Marner View Results