THREE and a half years into a war that has left 200,000 dead, forced more than 10m from their homes and sucked in America, Russia and a host of regional meddlers, the UN has a new plan for Syria: “Aleppo first”. It seeks to fix a local ceasefire in Aleppo, once a proud and bustling metropolis of 3m that has been reduced to a pockmarked carcass of mostly empty buildings, in the hope of gradually “freezing” battles elsewhere.

Don’t hold your breath. The limited scope of the initiative, proposed on November 10th by Staffan de Mistura, the UN’s special envoy, underscores the intractability of this century’s bloodiest conflict. A break in the fighting that has split Aleppo in two would certainly cheer its surviving residents, many of whom no longer care who wins. But too many factors militate against even a limited local ceasefire, let alone a negotiated peace.

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

President Bashar al-Assad’s government said it would study the ceasefire plan, which Mr de Mistura described as a potential building block for a wider solution. “Of course they won’t say no,” says Emile Hokayem of the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a think-tank in London. “Assad likes anything that appears to bolster his legitimacy.” Yet he notes that previous Syrian ceasefires have tended to come in two contexts: either regime forces have besieged a rebel district and offered a choice between starvation and surrender, or a halt to fighting has proven tactically useful, allowing the government to redeploy forces elsewhere.

In fact, Mr Assad has been doing better lately. The American-led air assault against Islamic State (IS) and other jihadist groups has battered some of his foes, and allowed him to pose as an ally in fighting terrorists. Mr Assad has ramped up his own, far less discriminating, aerial bombardment of rebel areas. And he has been able to release ground forces to make gains in some places, including Aleppo, after months of stalemate.

America’s decision to hit jihadist groups other than IS has further splintered the fractious rebels. Some have defected to extremist groups, including IS and Jabhat al-Nusra (which is affiliated to al-Qaeda), convinced that America’s coalition is in effect an ally of Mr Assad’s. Revelations that President Barack Obama promised not to attack the Assad regime in a secret letter to Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader and Mr Assad’s staunchest ally, have deepened such Sunni fears.

Yet, even though they are hopelessly squeezed between the regime and hostile IS forces, which control territory to the east of Aleppo, mainstream rebel groups inside the city seem determined to hold on. A commander laid out four conditions in response to Mr de Mistura: a halt to bombing by the regime; release of political prisoners (whose number is estimated at 85,000); the expulsion of “criminal terrorist militias” allied to the government (ie, Iranian-funded Lebanese and Iraqi fighters who bolster Syria’s depleted army); and the surrender for trial of those responsible for using chemical weapons against Syrian civilians. Bravado, perhaps, but despite the attrition of war and the waning enthusiasm of the rebels’ supporters in the West and the Gulf, Mr Assad’s foes continue to harass his forces. Fierce aerial bombardments have not stopped a slow, steady rebel advance from the south towards the capital, Damascus.

Given the nastiness of the regime and the gathering strength of the jihadists, the bleak underlying reality facing the people of Syria is well captured by a commentator in Aleppo who writes under the pseudonym Edward Dark: “an outright victory by either side is neither a real possibility nor a desirable prospect.”