CLOSE President Trump reprised his attacks on former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick, telling supporters in Ky. that 'they like when people stand for the American flag.' Wochit

Colin Kaepernick was selected as one of Time's 100 most influential people of 2017. (Photo: Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP file)

Colin Kaepernick, whose national anthem protest sparked equal amounts of applaud and outrage, was named one of Time's 100 most influential people of 2017.

The former Wolf Pack quarterback, who is an NFL free agent, began his protest of the anthem by first sitting and then kneeling as it was played before NFL games. Other NFL players, including Nevada alum Brandon Marshall, followed his lead. During a game against Purdue, a dozen Wolf Pack players held a single fist in the air during the anthem.

Kaepernick said his protest was over the oppression of minorities, including police brutality.

"I am not going to stand up to show pride in a flag for a country that oppresses black people and people of color," Kaepernick told NFL Media about his protest. "To me, this is bigger than football and it would be selfish on my part to look the other way. There are bodies in the street and people getting paid leave and getting away with murder."

Kaepernick, who donned the cover of Time magazine last September, went on to say he loved America and his protest was being misunderstood and wasn't a statement against the military. He pledged to donate $1 million (he's donated $400,000 so far) and sent food, water and aid via plane to Somalia, which is experiencing a historic famine. He also started free "Know Your Rights" camps for youth.

President Donald Trump, who has taken credit for Kaepernick being unemployed, was critical of the quarterback during the president race.

“I think it’s personally not a good thing," Trump said of the protest. "I think it’s a terrible thing. And, you know, maybe he should find a country that works better for him. Let him try. It won’t happen.”

Time listed Kaepernick among the "icons" in its 100 most influential list. His former 49ers' quarterback, Jim Harbaugh, penned the Time write-up applauding Kaepernick. Harbaugh initially said he was against the act – "I acknowledge his right to do it, but I don't respect the motivation or the action," he said – before changing his stance.

"I thank Colin for all he has contributed to the game of football as an outstanding player and trusted teammate," Harbaugh wrote in Time. "I also applaud Colin for the courage he has demonstrated in exercising his guaranteed right of free speech. His willingness to take a position at personal cost is now part of our American story. How lucky for us all and for our country to have among our citizens someone as remarkable as Colin Kaepernick."