0 SHARES Facebook Twitter Google Whatsapp Pinterest Print Mail Flipboard

As former acting attorney general Sally Yates prepares to testify, Donald Trump lashed out this morning via his customary outlet, Twitter, to attack both the Obama administration and Sally Yates herself.

In his first tweet, Trump went after the Obama administration, attempting to shift blame for the hiring of Michael Flynn off himself and onto his predecessor:

General Flynn was given the highest security clearance by the Obama Administration – but the Fake News seldom likes talking about that. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 8, 2017

Oh, dear, things seem to have gotten too deep for Trump almost immediately, as national security expert and former NSA analyst John Schindler quickly pointed out:

WH does not adjudicate clearances. IRL Obama fired #MoscowMike as DIA director because he's an incompetent asshat. https://t.co/R0ZYtK5hQZ — John Schindler (@20committee) May 8, 2017

Schindler further dismantled Trump’s absurd attempt at blame-shifting by a simple appeal to logic and fact:

Flynn was commissioned in Army MI in 1981. By Trump's "logic" Reagan, Bush 41, Clinton, Bush 43 & Obama all cleared him. This is insane BS. — John Schindler (@20committee) May 8, 2017

Trump’s second tweet was directed at Sally Yates:

Ask Sally Yates, under oath, if she knows how classified information got into the newspapers soon after she explained it to W.H. Council. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 8, 2017

Again, Schindler quickly pointed to the fly in Trump’s buttermilk (a mistake Trump has since quietly corrected to “counsel”):

There's a WH Counsel. And there's a National Security Council. There is no "WH Council". POTUS is a complete moron. https://t.co/hUMBsq7NKS — John Schindler (@20committee) May 8, 2017

Schindler followed that up with a stinging condemnation of Trump’s continued dishonesty and where it’s going to get him (hint: not a good place):

There's so much dishonest desperation in this tweet you can taste it across the room. Gonna be a bad week for Trump & his #KremlinGate pals. — John Schindler (@20committee) May 8, 2017

Donald Trump has good reason to be frightened and good reason to want to shift blame for his hiring of Kremlin mole Michael Flynn onto Obama, who fired the guy and to discredit Sally Yates, who has the proverbial “goods” on Donald Trump.

John Schindler called it: Trump is a complete moron and he has only himself to blame for the fix in which he finds himself.

His desperate and increasingly pathetic attempts to blame everybody himself for everything he did wrong will stand out in historical accounts of his dizzying fall from the heights vaulting ambition.

If you’re ready to read more from the unbossed and unbought Politicus team, sign up for our newsletter here! Email address: Leave this field empty if you're human: