A pictorial look at the career of City's latest recruit

An Italian Under-21 International, Federico joined the Manchester United youth set-up from Lazio in 2007, going on to top the Under-18 scoring charts in his first season at Old Trafford, netting 12 goals in 21 appearances.





A man whose experience defies his tender years, Macheda burst onto the scene as a 17-year-old as he came off the bench against Aston Villa in 2009. 2-1 down at the time, Cristiano Ronaldo grabbed an equaliser for United before the Italian curled home a debut goal in stoppage time to win the match for Sir Alex Ferguson’s title challenging side.





Macheda continued to feature in the United squad that season, scoring his second goal for the club against Sunderland just 46 seconds after taking the field to replace Dimitar Berbatov before being rewarded with his first Barclays Premier League start for United against Middlesbrough that season.





It was a remarkable breakthrough campaign that saw him named the Jimmy Murphy Academy Player of the Year, an award also won by Mats Møller Dæhli, in recognition of his rise to the senior set-up at Old Trafford.





A Champions League debut against CSKA Moscow followed the next season before injury started to hinder his progress in establishing himself as a United first-team regular. He returned to score in a top-of-the-table clash against Chelsea later in that season, with his fourth goal for United coming the following year against Aston Villa.





The following few years saw him look to impress away from Old Trafford as he undertook a series of loan spells away from the club. 2011 saw him return to his native Italy for a spell with Sampdoria before 2012-13 saw him have stints at Queens Park Rangers and VfB Stuttgart.





It was 2013-14 campaign that saw ‘Kiko’ enjoy his most fruitful spell away from his parent club, first scoring three goals in two stints at Championship Doncaster Rovers before aiding Birmingham City’s push for survival with ten goals in 18 appearances for Lee Clark’s side.





WATCH AN EXCLUSIVE FIRST INTERVIEW WITH FEDERICO MACHEDA ON CARDIFF CITY PLAYER NOW. FOR A TEASER, WATCH THE YOUTUBE VIDEO BELOW.



