The Dallas Police Officers Association PAC endorsed Texas Governor Greg Abbott in his bid for re-election. The nod comes on the same day Dallas County Sheriff Lupe Valdez announced her run against the incumbent governor in 2018.

Frederick Frazier, 1st vice president of the Dallas Police Association PAC praised the governor for his commitment to increasing public safety and for building a strong relationship between law enforcement officials and their communities, according to a statement provided to Breitbart Texas by the Abbott for Governor Campaign.

“Governor Greg Abbott has been a true advocate for law enforcement in Dallas and throughout our state,” Frazier said. “He has strengthened protections for our officers in the line of duty, and has worked to make sure we have the resources to better serve our communities. Texas needs four more years of Governor Greg Abbott to ensure our officers here in Dallas have the support they need to keep our communities safe.”

Governor Abbott has put law enforcement officers first during his tenure as the head of state government. Following the murder of five Dallas-area police officers in July 2016, Governor Abbott flew back from Texas to attend a press conference with Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings despite having been severely burned. The governor did not announce his injury until after the funeral to avoid distracting attention from the slain officers.

Doctors advised the governor not to attend the meeting because of the risk of infection. Abbott’s first words were, “I’ve got to come back,” spokesman Matt Hirsch told the Dallas Morning News after the word of the governor’s injury spread. “It was hugely important for him to be in Dallas the next day without regard to his well-being.”

In response to the murder of the officers, Abbott began the process of issuing rifle-resistant body armor to police officers. He also proposed legislation to make targeting police officers with acts of violence a hate crime, Breitbart Texas reported.

“I, along with so many Texans, have a deep respect for our law enforcement officers,” Abbott said while thanking the officers association for their endorsement. “They put their lives on the line each and every day to make our communities safer, and we remain grateful for their sacrifice and dedication.”

“I am committed to increasing support and protections for our police officers, and I will do whatever I can to make sure they know that Texans have their backs,” the governor continued. “I am honored to receive the endorsement of the Dallas Police Association PAC. I am committed to working alongside our law enforcement officers over the next four years to improve public safety and to make sure that the men and women in law enforcement have the support and protection that they need to carry out their duties.”

The Dallas Police Officers Association is the largest police employee organization in Dallas, Frazer stated. “We are proud to endorse Governor Greg Abbott for reelection as governor of Texas,” he announced on Wednesday.

Bob Price serves as associate editor and senior political news contributor for Breitbart Texas. He is a founding member of the Breitbart Texas team. Follow him on Twitter @BobPriceBBTX, GAB, and Facebook.