I absolutely love strawberries and cook with them frequently. I’ve tried to grow them several times in our gardens but there is just something about our property that strawberries do not like. I console myself by going strawberry picking at a local strawberry patch every year and then freeze batches of them so I have them available to me year round. When I came across a recipe for Strawberry Rhubarb Crumble in The Beekman 1802 Heirloom Cookbook, I knew I wanted to try it. My only problem was that our rhubarb plant hadn’t come up yet! I really wanted to try this crumble recipe so I decided to substitute some blueberries I had frozen over the summer instead.

This post may be sponsored. Post contains affiliate links. I may be compensated if you make a purchase using my link.

Strawberry Rhubarb Crumble recipe

Filling

2 pounds strawberries, halved or quartered if large (5 cups)

1 pound rhubarb, cut in 1-inch lengths (or 1 pound blueberries)

2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar

1 cup granulated sugar

3 tablespoons all-purpose flour

1/4 teaspoon salt

Streusel Topping

1 cup old fashioned rolled oats

1 cup all purpose flour

1 cup packed light brown sugar

10 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut into bits

Preheat the oven to 425F.

For the filling: In a large bowl, combine the strawberries, rhubarb/blueberries, and vinegar and toss to combine. Add the granulated sugar, flour, and salt and toss again. Transfer the mixture to a 9 inch square baking dish.

For the Streusel topping: In a medium bowl, combine the oats, flour, and brown sugar. With your fingers, cut in the butter until the mixture forms large clumbs. Scatter topping over the fruit.

Place the baking dish on a rimmed baking sheet to catch any drips and bake for 35 to 40 minutes or until the filling is bubbling and the topping is crisp.

Serve plain, with ice cream or with whipped cream.

This is absolutely delicious. This crumble recipe is quick and easy to make and can be made with either fresh or frozen fruit. This is a great way to use up berries that might be getting a little bit too soft to eat fresh. I grew up eating crumbles and crisps and this crumble recipe really brings back memories.