Jess said she was sorry for getting her father into trouble (pic: MEN) A man who was arrested and cautioned for slapping his 13-year-old daughter across the face fears he will no longer be able to work with children. Jim McCullough, of Manchester, hit Jess after she banged a neighbour's window at midnight, and she called the police. He has now quit the football coaching and community work he has done for over 15 years, as the caution could stop him working with vulnerable children. Mr McCullough said he had never slapped Jess before. She has apologised. The father-of-four said he felt striking Jess was the only way to get her to understand what she had done. The single parent, from Wythenshawe, said: "I wish I had asked for my day in court rather than accepted a police caution. "That way I could have explained that I was trying to do what was right for my daughter. I did deserve the slapping because of the things I'd been doing

Jess McCullough "Jess isn't bad, but some of the 13-year-olds who live here do use drugs and drink and I don't want that path for her." Mr McCullough said he had had no trouble with his other three children Christopher, 22, Nicola, 21, and Joanna, 19. A Greater Manchester Police spokesman said: "When an offence is admitted the offender is always liable to receive a caution. "Had the offence not been admitted, officers would have pursued the matter with the CPS. 'Wrong message' "An allegation of domestic violence was made and GMP officers always take these allegations very seriously." Mr McCullough previously had a clean criminal record and recently qualified as a security guard, but said his work prospects had been ruined. Jess, a year nine pupil at Parklands High School in Wythenshawe, said she was sorry for what had happened. She said: "I did deserve the slapping because of the things I'd been doing. "I was expecting my dad to come home from the police station and for everything to be the same as before." National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) policy manager Lucy Thorpe said: "All parents can sometimes be pushed to the limit by teenagers who are looking to see how far they can go but smacking won't solve the problem. "It simply tells your child that violence is acceptable and gives the message that it's all right for them to hit other people." Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play. Advertisement



E-mail this to a friend Printable version Bookmark with: Delicious

Digg

reddit

Facebook

StumbleUpon What are these?