Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump greets the crowd as he arrives to speak at a campaign rally in Fredericksburg, Va. (Photo: Courtesy photo)

Donald Trump will host a public rally at Asheville's U.S. Cellular Center on Sept. 12. Doors open at 3 p.m., and the event begins at 6 p.m.

Tickets are available at no charge through the Trump campaign's website, donaldjtrump.com/schedule/register/asheville-nc.

Nathan West, chair of the Buncombe County GOP, which helped organize the event, said he's expecting a casual rally as opposed to a formal, teleprompter speech.

“I think it’s going to be more of a rally," he said. "I don’t think there’s going to be any specific policy, but I’m not 100 percent sure right now. We just wanted to make a statement in Asheville and to let people know Western North Carolina is in play.”

The Republican National Committee, the North Carolina GOP, the local Republican party and the Trump campaign are involved in organizing the event, West said.

Other GOP leaders will attend the rally, West said, but those details are forthcoming.

West said the organizers are prepared for crowds and protesters.

“Have we heard of any (protests)? No. But I’m sure that will develop over the next few days," he said.

The United States Secret Service is in charge of security in and around the U.S. Cellular Center, said Joey Robison, public information officer for the city of Asheville, which owns the venue. Local law enforcement will play a supporting role, she said.

Matt Quinn, public information officer at the Secret Service's field office in Charlotte, said he could not release details about road closures or protest procedures, but he said details might become available prior to the event.

Drivers who do not have to come downtown Monday should avoid the area because of traffic and security, West said. The U.S. Cellular Center website encourages attendees to carpool.

West said the event will highlight the number of Trump supporters in the area. Republican organizers want to show that Buncombe County and Western North Carolina are significant this election season, he explained.

“I think Asheville, specifically Buncombe County, there is some doubt as to the momentum here," he said.

The Asheville metro area displayed a variety of results in the presidential primary in March.

More Buncombe County residents voted for Democrat Bernie Sanders than all the Republican candidates combined.

In Henderson County, where the majority of primary voters were Republican, Ted Cruz was the front runner, although Trump was a close second with 8,374 and 7,042 votes, respectively. He also placed second behind Cruz in Transylvania County's primary.

In Haywood County, Trump was the No. 1 Republican primary candidate, although Sanders and Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton each garnered more votes.

In Madison County, Trump lagged behind Sanders, Clinton and Cruz, and Democrats outnumbered Republicans.

Trump performed best in the far western portion of the state. He was No. 1 in presidential primaries in Macon, Graham, Swain, Cherokee and Clay counties. He also performed best in McDowell, Polk and Avery counties.

It's unclear whether Trump will make additional Western North Carolina stops. The Trump campaign was not immediately available for comment Thursday.

Online, Trump's schedule is sparsely populated. Asheville is the only campaign stop scheduled after Friday, when he will appear in Washington, D.C. and Pensacola, Florida.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/2ca2BSI