The handy to-do list and task management app Astrid is shutting down. What's your favorite app for simple task reminders?

Yahoo-owned Astrid was scheduled to shut down on Monday. (Photo11: Photodisc Getty Images) Story Highlights Yahoo acquired Astrid in May

The Astrid service is scheduled to shut down on Monday

Any.do is a handy replacement for simple task management

SAN FRANCISCO — Today's to-do list: Settle on a good replacer for Astrid, the handy Yahoo-acquired to-do list app that is slated to shut down today.

Done and done.

In the spirit of the handy little reminder and task management app, the Astrid team on Sunday night sent an email to users reminding us that the service is shutting down on Monday and will no longer be available. Astrid had about 4 million downloads before its purchase by Yahoo in May for an undisclosed sum.

As of Sunday night, you could download any data you wanted to retain from the service at astrid.com/home/export.

The folks at Astrid recommended several replacements — Wrike, Wunderlist, Sandglaz, and Any.do — though there are a truly exhausting number of to-do list apps available on multiple platforms.

I didn't want to spend a ton of time checking out alternatives. After a quick search in Google Play, Apple's App Store and the web a few weeks ago, I settled on Any.do and it has filled nearly all of my simple requirements.

It's simple to add a task reminder in Any.do and that is all I really want in a to-do list app — a way to quickly add tasks, prompts and lists to get me through my personal day and work day: Move the car! Edit these stories! Call this person back!

Any.do, from an Israel-based startup, does all that in a very minimalist way, much like Astrid, which I'd latched onto as much for its cheeky prompts as ease of use. I liked that I could log in with my Google account and sync tasks across my devices — whether Android or iOS or via the web (like Astrid, there's also a Chrome browser extension for Any.do). You could use it to screen incoming calls or set up meeting reminders. Any.do does all of that too, although you must either create an account or log in via Facebook rather than Google.

There is nice integration with my Gmail account with Any.do. Open an email and you see an Any.do task bar offering "What's next" options — "follow up with Margie," "set up meeting with XX".

Yahoo bought Astrid in May —— one in a dizzying string of acquisitions under CEO Marissa Mayer as part of the company's efforts to reach a younger, mobile audience.

Readers: What's your favorite to-do list/tast management app? Drop us a note at techcomments@usatoday.com.

Follow Nancy Blair on Twitter: @nansanfran.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1emqQ9Z