Kaju katli recipe with step by step photos. Kaju katli (vegan cashew fudge) recipe or kaju barfi recipe is one of the most sought after Indian sweet recipes. Here is an easy kaju katli recipe for beginners to try without sugar syrup.

These thin, melt in mouth and smooth kaju katlis are just like what you get in sweet stalls. This is one of the most tried and tested recipes from the blog too. Do try out this fool proof kaju katli recipe as a treat to the family or edible gift during festivals like Diwali, navratri, Ganesh chaturthi etc. Kaju katli recipe or kaju barfi recipe or Indian vegan cashew fudge recipe is a royal Indian sweet that takes a pride position in most Indian festival treats. It is one of the most loved sweets and often gifted to friends and relatives during festivals like diwali. I have tried making kaju katli recipe 2-3 years before and did not get it right. I always have a problem with sugar syrups . I try to stay away from sweets calling for even one string syrup and the most popular recipe of kaju katli is the one with powdered cashews and one string syrup,obviously not my cup of tea. I so badly wanted to try kaju katli recipe as it one of our favorite sweets and I was desperately searching for kaju katli without sugar syrup recipe. I found this easiest recipe for kaju katli in Mrs Mallika Badrinath’s 100 sweet varieties and there was no need for sugar syrup.You just have to grind sugar and cashew,mix and cook,can it get easier than this . Usually varak (edible silver foil) is placed on kaju katli but i never use it.

Though this is an easy kaju katli recipe we need to be extremely focused and careful as when to stop cooking,kneading etc. Please be sure to check the notes section for more pointers. This kaju katli recipe is so rich that you wont believe it is vegan.I have used just a drop of ghee just to grease the plate and that can be avoided too if you wish. There is absolutely no need for ghee in this recipe, this is a vegan Indian cashew fudge recipe 🙂 I can confidently say this is the best recipe for kaju katli that even beginners can try without any fear. I really urge you all to try this quick and simple kaju kalti recipe or kaju burfi recipe as it is called in few places and surprise your loved ones with this royal Indian sweet 🙂

To make kaju katli recipe you have to make sure your cashews are at room temperature. Do not use cashews that were stored in fridge. Make sure to bring the cashew nuts to room temperature. You can even dry roast the cashews briefly to remove the moisture in them. You can flavor kaju katli recipe with rose water or saffron. I like to add saffron in kaju burfi. This royal Indian sweet kaju katli keeps well for up to a week at room temperature. There are few kaju katli recipes with milk but the should be consumed on the same day as prepared.

Store kaju katli in airtight container and serve kaju katli as required.

Another delicious variation of kaju katli recipe is kesar kaju katli. You can even try badam katli, kaju pista rolls,kaju strawberry recipes.

Here is how to make kaju katli recipe with step by step photos.

Few more Indian sweet recipes you might like are coconut pista ladoo, quick chocolate burfi, easy dhoodh peda, badam katli

How to make kaju katli recipe with step by step photos.

1.Soak cashews in water for 30 minutes. I soaked the cashews in hot water, you can soak in milk too but kaju katlis made that way have less shelf life.

2. Powder the sugar using a dry grinder or mixer.

2. Grind cashews to a very fine paste. You can use the milk or water used for soaking to ease the grinding. You have to grind the cashews to a very smooth and fine paste with minimum water. For the 1 cup of cashews I used 3 tablespoons water for grinding.

3.Measure one cup of ground cashew paste and powdered sugar and take in a non stick pan. Mix well. Make sure to mix very well before you start cooking as the mixture gets cooked very easily.

4.Now heat the mixture over low-medium flame and start to stir. Mix well and keep stirring in low flame. keep scarping the sediments while stirring. Add saffron and mix well.

5. Keep stirring for 7-10 minutes, The kaju sugar mixture will start bubbling and it will begin to thicken. Make sure to scrape the edges while stirring. Add saffron at this stage if you want to add.

6. Once the kaju sugar mixture forms a lump and gathers in the center,pinch a very small amount and make a ball with your fingers. if you are able to form a ball,then it is the correct consistency. Switch off the flame and let the mixture cool for a while.

7.Once the mixture is warm to touch,knead into a very soft dough. This is the very important step for getting perfect,soft melt in mouth kaju katli. You should not let the mixture cool down completely. Knead the kaju mixture in to a very smooth dough while it is still warm. If you are unable to knead you may add few drops of warm milk but again that will reduce the shelf life.

8.Roll the dough into a 1/4 inch thick circle and make diamond shaped pieces. The thickness of kaju katlis is your choice. The kaju katlis you get in shops will be very thin,so roll the dough as thin or thick as you prefer.

9. Allow the pieces to set for 10 minutes. Store kaju katlis airtight in room temperature. If you refrigerate the kaju katlis may turn a bit hard.

Kaju katli recipe card below:

5 from 6 votes Print Kaju katli recipe, cashew fudge recipe | how to make kaju katli Prep Time 30 mins Cook Time 10 mins Total Time 40 mins Kaju katli recipe is a royal Indian sweet,vegan cashew fudge,rich melt in mouth with just 4 ingredients! Course: Sweet/dessert Cuisine: Indian Servings : 20 kaju katlis Calories : 83 kcal Author : Harini Ingredients (1 cup=250 ml) 1 cup cashews

1 cup powdered sugar

1/8 teaspoon saffron optional

1/2 teaspoon cardamom powder Instructions Soak cashews in water for 30 minutes. Powder the sugar. Grind cashews to a very fine paste,just y sprinkling water. Measure one cup of ground cashew paste and powdered sugar and take in a non stick pan. Mix well. Now heat the mixture over low-medium flame and start to stir. Add saffron and mix well Keep stirring for 7-10 minutes,till the mixture thickens and leaves the sides.Scrape the edges while stirring. Once the mixture forms a lump and gathers in the center,pinch a very small amount and make a ball with your fingers. if you are able to form a ball,then it is the correct consistency.Switch off the flame and let the mixture cool for a while. Once the mixture is warm to touch,knead into a very soft dough. Roll the dough into a 1/4 inch thick circle and make diamond shaped pieces. Allow the pieces to set for 10 minutes. Store kaju katlis airtight. Recipe Notes 1. Do not add more water while grinding. Just sprinkle to ease the grinding,the cashew paste should be very smooth.

2.Do not cook the mixture more than 10 minutes. Once the lump reaches soft ball stage,remove from flame.The mixture will further thicken when it cools.

3.Knead the mixture very well but gently,the more you knead the more soft your kaju katlis will be.

4. If the dough seems to be dry you can a tablespoon of milk or water while kneading.

Sharing is caring!