FC Dallas travel to Denver this Friday to face the Colorado Rapids in a rematch of the match no one will forget this year. The last time these teams faced off, Colorado picked FC Dallas apart piece by piece and went on to score four goals in a 4-0 romping, the worst loss for FC Dallas in the Oscar Pareja era. It was a loss that made this FC Dallas team much more focused, and motivated, which we saw in the match against Toronto. This week could also mark the return of Mauro Diaz, which could change Colorado’s game plan heading into this Friday’s match.

The biggest thing we saw during the last match against Colorado was that the Rapids knew exactly what FC Dallas were going to do, and stuck to their guns to shut down Dallas. After the quick goal Colorado got from Dominique Badji, all they had to do was see out their game plan. The plan was to force FC Dallas into the middle and never effectively use Fabian Castillo or Ryan Hollingshead.

When you do not have the passing prowess of Mauro Diaz in the midfield, which Dallas did not have against Colorado the first time, it can be troubling. There was no one there to play cutting through balls through the middle of the backline. The plan was very effective, as no one on this FC Dallas team has quite the vision that Diaz has and it was apparent as they could not find the open outside pass.

Move the calendar forward eight days, and we see a motivated FC Dallas come out and run rampant over Toronto FC until a storm comes and delays the game ruining their flow. We really have to look at the three goals we saw from FC Dallas, as they were exactly what FC Dallas want to do week in and week out.

The first goal was made with brilliant passing, and burning speed from Fabian Castillo proving that Castillo is absolutely one of the most dangerous attackers in MLS. It was the fastest goal against an MLS opponent in club history. The second goal was a brilliant through ball from Blas Perez and a great curler from Castillo, and goal number three was just flat out hustle from Hollingshead and then Perez being Perez with his poacher goal.

FC Dallas played exactly how they wanted to play, and with passion. If you compare the Toronto defense with the Colorado defense head-to-head, they Toronto defense is facing injuries, and not been as stout as the Colorado defense. Obviously Castillo facing off with Nick Hagglund plays in favor of Castillo.

The Colorado defense can be beat on the counter attack as Seattle proved, so the speed of Castillo, possibly Michael Barrios and the passing of Mauro Diaz will be crucial in breaking down Colorado and not getting the 4-0 smacking that happened last time out. Mauro Diaz is expected to make his return as he practiced with the ones for the full week. With Marcelo Sarvas missing due to suspension, the Colorado midfield will be vulnerable.

Against Toronto, Michel and Victor Ulloa had a much better showing than what they had against Colorado the first time out. As noted, of their 14 unsuccessful passes, 6 of them were inside Dallas’ own half. They improved greatly in the match against Toronto with 18 unsuccessful passes, only 4 made FC Dallas have to reel back on the defensive. Most were near the halfway line. With Mauro Diaz expected to make his return, Michel could be forced out of the XI, if FC Dallas goes into a 4-4-2. That would put Diaz and Ulloa as the midfielders for Friday.

Defensively, FC Dallas looked confused last time out against Colorado. The combination of Walker Zimmerman and Zach Loyd proved to be leaky, and Je-Vaughn Watson was rusty in his first start back. In the Toronto match we saw the normal combo of Matt Hedges, who was injured for the last match against Colorado, and Zach Loyd, which looked a lot better, and much more organized.

Really, the biggest FC Dallas defensive gaff came in the 85th minute when they did not close Sebastian Giovinco down, and he hit an outstanding curler that almost went in from the top of box. The defense was great in playing defense in front and making Toronto attack them, and being up to the task. The two goals for Toronto were absolute class from Giovinco that Real Madrid would have trouble stopping.

Colorado have only won one of their past four at home, so FC Dallas may have caught them at a right time. This one is a tough one to call, as FC Dallas are motivated and are good enough to beat the Rapids, but the Rapids have the confidence of a 4-0 win under their belt and know FC Dallas’ weaknesses. This is a new Dallas team though, they are motivated and never want to let a score line like that happen again.