Hillary Clinton and her aides directed Platte River Networks to systematically alter, fabricate and forge emails to protect her communications from being “exposed to anyone,” according to documents obtained by True Pundit.

The request was so unusual and complex that Denver-based Platte River IT executives, who maintained Clinton’s private email server, had to turn to other IT gurus on a clandestine chat forum for a solution to try to satisfy their “VIP” client, as executives dubbed Clinton. Platte River computer specialist Paul Combetta turned to a web forum on computer coding to solicit help with Clinton’s directive to forge her emails, according to documents. Writing under the seemingly-stealth screen name “stonetear,” Combetta asked reddit.com forum users in July 2014:

“Hello all- I may be facing a very interesting situation where I need to strip out a VIP’s (VERY VIP) email address from a bunch of archived email that I have both in a live Exchange mailbox, as well as a PST file. Basically, they don’t want the VIP’s email address exposed to anyone, and want to be able to either strip out or replace the email address in the to/from fields in all of the emails we want to send out. I am not sure if something like this is possible with PowerShell, or exporting all of the emails to MSG and doing find/replaces with a batch processing program of some sort. Does anyone have experience with something like this, and/or suggestions on how this might be accomplished?”

Combetta’s online plea for guidance was met with limited resistance, as many users offered advice on how he could effectively alter the emails. One user, however warned him that he could be stepping into a legal mine field: “To my knowledge, there’s no way to edit existing messages, that’s a possibility for a (legal) discovery nightmare.”

True Pundit was able to trace the screen name “stonetear” directly to Combetta, as he has used it exclusively for social media and gaming accounts, as well as certain anonymous email accounts, according to our intelligence. Combetta never revealed his real name or company name in the communications but the IT specialist with no security clearance did divulge: “I have full access to the server.”

These damning revelations comprise the first public intelligence pinpointed indicating that Platte River was directly requested to perform what can only be described as illegally altering Clinton’s emails and related federal records.

The criminal code, 18 U.S. Code § 1519, dealing with destruction, alteration, or falsification of records in Federal investigations and bankruptcy is very clear. It states: Whoever knowingly alters, destroys, mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry in any record, document, or tangible object with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence the investigation or proper administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the United States or any case filed under title 11, or in relation to or contemplation of any such matter or case, shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both. While previous laws applied only to an “official proceeding,” like a public FBI investigation, or pending judicial and federal agency proceedings, the new stipulations in subsection § 802 passed under Sarbanes-Oxley now also covers those individuals who destroy or fabricate documents merely “in contemplation” of a future investigation or “any matter” within the jurisdiction of a federal agency.

“The issue is that these emails involve the private email address of someone you’d recognize, and we’re trying to replace it with a placeholder address as to not expose it,” Combetta wrote later in the forum to answer a user’s technical questions. “I think maybe I wasn’t clear enough in the original post. I have these emails available in a PST file. Can I rewrite them in the PST? I could also export to MSG and do some sort of batch find/replace. Anyone know of tools that might help with this?”

Combetta is also accused of deleting an untold number Clinton’s emails despite orders from Congress to preserve them. Platte River’s destruction of these emails followed months of warnings from by the House Select Committee on Benghazi to obtain them. The house select committee likewise instructed Clinton’s attorney David Kendall on Dec. 2, 2014, to retain these emails, and a formal House subpoena was issued on March 4, 2015.

Combetta and a Platte River colleague Bill Thornton were on Capitol Hill last week answering subpoenas to testify before the Oversight and Government Reform Committee. Combetta refused to answer all of committee chairman Congressman Jason Chaffetz’s questions about his role in maintaining Clinton’s private server. That included Chaffetz’s inquiry on whether Combetta received an immunity agreement from the Justice Deoartment to cooperate with the FBI’s now defunct criminal investigation into Clinton’s handling of classified email while secretary of state. Combetta cited his 5th Amendment right not to incriminate himself at the hearing. Combetta’s immunity agreement was divulged in a recent New York Times article detailing its stipulations.

Congressman Chaffetz’s committee has shed light on other internal Platte River communications where company executives scurried to distance the company from what they believed was Clinton “covering up some shaddy s- -t.”

In another internal message, one executive called Clinton’s requests to Platte River “Hillary’s coverup operation.”

These new revelations, however, place a white-hot light on the FBI’s arrangement with Combetta. If FBI agents were aware of this request from Clinton to illegally mask her emails, one has to wonder even more than usual how Clinton walked away without an indictment form the bureau’s year-long probe. This only adds to other recent troubling revelations regarding the FBI’s investigation.

-30-

Queen #HillarysEmails Server Hosting Company BUSTED Erasing Backups, Then Clams Up at Oversight Hearing Part 1 RT pic.twitter.com/pHPS5sHAM3 — Thomas Paine (@Thomas1774Paine) September 15, 2016