Keith Law gets Twitter suspension over evolution argument with Curt Schilling

In a headline so improbable it seems like it could only come from a “Seinfeld” episode, ESPN suspended baseball analyst Keith Law from Twitter for getting into an argument with Curt Schilling about evolution, according to a report.

Last week, Schilling, who is also an analyst for ESPN, went on Twitter to discuss and disprove evolution. Schilling responded to many people arguing with him over Twitter, including Law, who tried to dispute Schilling’s beliefs.

Below are some of the tweets:

@gehrig38 @zoowithroy You can't have fossils "between" two species if one didn't descend from the other – e.g., monkeys and humans. — keithlaw (@keithlaw) November 13, 2014

Seriously, if someone says evolution is wrong because there aren't fossils between monkeys and men, find a monkey and hit him with it. — keithlaw (@keithlaw) November 13, 2014

No, I won't. Science is infinitely more important. “@toddhampton: @keithlaw Getting into science now huh? Stick to baseball.” — keithlaw (@keithlaw) November 13, 2014

@gehrig38 @zoowithroy Yes. It's a strong, well-sourced article. Feel free to send refutations of those transitional fossils. — keithlaw (@keithlaw) November 13, 2014

@mro60 I haven't criticized or questioned anyone's faith. I oppose anti-science, that's all. — keithlaw (@keithlaw) November 13, 2014

What’s interesting is that Law is a prolific tweeter but has been silent on the platform since Wednesday. That is because Deadspin says ESPN asked him to take a little break from Twitter through Monday.

Though ESPN did confirm the suspension, it said in a statement that the suspension did not have to do with Law’s opinions on evolution.

“Keith’s Twitter suspension had absolutely nothing to do with his opinions on the subject,” ESPN said in a statement via Awful Announcing.

The reported reason for the punishment seems awfully bizarre. Law did not seem to be out of line or overly confrontational in his tweets to Schilling. About his only questionable tweet was telling folks to hit someone with a monkey.

Law is highly opinionated and typically confrontational, so this is not really new for him. It’s odd ESPN decided to suspend him.