



[This unedited press release is made available courtesy of Gamasutra and its partnership with notable game PR-related resource GamesPress.]

Seoul, Korea – January 19 th, 2017 – WEBZEN, a global developer and publisher of free-to-play games, has announced the dates of the 2 nd closed beta phase for its upcoming action MMORPG MU Legend. The second closed beta will take place for a week, from February 21 st to February 28 th, 2017. This new closed beta will focus on localization implementation. It will be fully localized in 5 new languages in order to thoroughly cater to global fans of the MU franchise. Unlike the initial closed beta, people from all around the world will now be able to unravel the mysteries of the continent of MU in the following languages: French, German, Brazilian-Portuguese, Spanish and Polish MU Legend's first CBT received more than 200,000 pre-registrations, and WEBZEN warmly welcomes players that have not yet signed up to pre-register for the next one at http://mulegend.webzen.com. Richard Moon, Head of Global Business at WEBZEN, commented: "The first closed beta was a massive success, with great community engagement and the collection of precious game-related data." He continued: "It's now time to go one step further in the publishing of the global version of MU Legend and to please our fans worldwide with a multi-language CBT. This will allow both existing and new players to enjoy the MU Legend experience to its fullest! We highly encourage everybody who did not participate in first global test due to language limitation to sign up now! Last but not least, we are excited to exclusively announce additional media partner key-giveaways in early February in order to make our precious global fans happy!" WEBZEN also announced there would be no data-wipe of the first CBT in order to allow players from every level bracket to participate during the week. After this week of testing, the developers will work hand-in-hand with the localization department to make sure the highest level of quality is achieved and will continue to work on the content revealed during G-Star 2016 for the open beta release. Players are also invited to discuss the game and join the official Facebook community at: http://facebook.com/MuLegendGlobal. To learn more about MU Legend, the different classes and features of the game, or to pre-register for the second global beta test, visit the official website: http://mulegend.webzen.com. About MU Legend MU Legend is the highly anticipated action MMO and follow-up to MU Online. It features fluid and stunning hack 'n' slash combat, content that caters to both solo and party play, and a deep and intriguing world that will satisfy new players and fans alike. Players can choose from four distinct classes - Dark Lord, Whisperer, Blader, and War Mage - and engage in the endless battle between the world of MU and Pandemonium. MU Legend offers spectacular visuals that will run on lower-end systems and boasts detailed art design with stunning effects. About WEBZEN Webzen Inc. (KOSDAQ) is a global developer and publisher of MMORPGs MU ORIGIN, MU ONLINE, CONTINENT OF THE NINTH SEAL (C9), the METIN series and an array of exciting game titles slated for release in the global game market. WEBZEN has expanded its service to Europe, North and South America and other countries by operating its global game portal webzen.com with 60 million players from all over the world. WEBZEN is currently working on the releases of PC MMORPG MU Legend and mobile golf game SHOT ONLINE M, amongst other game titles. Further information on WEBZEN and its games can be found at www.webzen.com .