This Article Comes From the Heart and Discusses an Issue We All Have in Common

The problem is being normal. What is being normal? It’s doing things that an average person does.

An average person for example comes home from their boring 9-5 job to either play video games, watch T.V., or watch porn maybe that person will do all of those things in one day. Many people in today’s society would say “Whats wrong with that, sounds normal?” EXACTLY that’s the issue in today’s society the life with no goals is NORMAL. The man considered normal has no motivation to self improve in life or become better. He might hate his job, be insecure with his body, and pity his mind but he wont do anything about it to the point where one of his most famous phrases is “Ill do something about it later.” The man might have settled with a woman that is either not as attractive or treats him like shit because she was in his reach or easy to get. You can ask this man how he feels about this woman but he will just exaggerate how great she is. This man is in a mental prison.

How Do We Escape This Prison?

By changing your mindset to become a greater you. See yourself as someone worthy to get what you want in life this will lead to success. However keep in mind material objects like money is a byproduct of success if you are only motivated to chase material objects you will always be unhappy because these material objects will only satisfy you for a certain amount of time. In turn if if you chase more freedom and opportunities in life material objects like money can get you there. If you want to be great in life and know what your purpose is chase whatever it is you want to become. Don’t ever say you can’t do something in life, stop blaming others you have control of your life. Use whatever you have in life. Don’t ever blame or pity yourself because your brain is so powerful that this pity can physically affect you and will stop you from doing positive things in life.

I want you to say to yourself that you have control over your life and whatever negative thoughts and words attack you brush them off because you know for a fact you are better than those petty actions. Stop creating fear in your life. I now will always use this famous quote from Franklin D. Roosevelt:

“The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”

Things like fear, pity, depression, shame, and anxiety are locks and things like being normal or in a comfort zone are like the walls of our mental prison. Escape this prison with tools of confidence, happiness, and faith in yourself.

I’m not trying to be poetic these are real and common issues that could be changed with a change of mindset.