New Delhi: US-based radio taxi service Uber has been given a seven-day ultimatum by the Delhi government to remove deficiencies in its application for running cabs in the national capital, failing which its plea to procure licence will be rejected.

Government has also given a final opportunity to another app-based cab service provider 'Serendipity Infolabs Pvt Ltd' to remove deficiencies found in its application.

Uber, which was banned two-and-a-half months ago after one of its drivers allegedly raped a woman, had applied for licence on January 22 to operate app-based taxi booking service through its subsidiary Resource Expert India Pvt Ltd.

The government, however, had issued a 'deficiency memo' on January 24 asking it to furnish all details before it as mentioned in recently introduced 'Modified Radio Taxi Scheme (2006),' an official said.

The scheme was finalised on January 1 following the outrage over thr rape of a woman on December 5 inside the Uber cab.

App-based taxi operator 'Taxi For Sure' and another operator had also applied for licences and similar 'deficiency memo' were served to them as well.

"We have issued them a deficiency memo on January 24 and a reminder was also sent in this regard on February 11. Since no reply was received on any of the two communications, we have given them a final opportunity to Uber to furnish the details within seven days," said a senior transport department official.

However, Uber issued a statement later in the evening, saying, "Uber has been and will continue to work with the authorities. We are evaluating the perceived deficiencies in the time period provided to us by the government."

Sources said that the three app-based taxi providers in their applications did not provide full details for procuring a licence according to laid down rules.

"In Uber's application, certificate/undertaking for parking of radio taxis was not provided. They also did not mention telephone number, e-mail address and address proof of their registered office in Delhi.

"Besides, call centre management details were also not provided in the application," a top source said.

Sources also said that in the application of Taxi For Sure, details of drivers and undertaking of induction schedule were not provided.

"Certificate/undertaking for parking of radio taxis was not provided in Taxi For Sure's applications. Call centre arrangement details and print out of of web portal were also not provided," the source added.

The official said that besides Uber, a seven-day final ultimatum has been given to 'Serendipity Infolabs Pvt Ltd'.

US-based taxi booking firm Uber had recently announced resumption of its services in the city but Delhi government immediately said that the company cannot operate as the ban imposed on it has not been revoked.

The international app-based cab booking firm was banned by Delhi government on December 8.

Earlier this month, Delhi government had decided to continue with the ban on Uber and asked it to fulfill the conditions for taxi operations in the national capital before seeking revocation of punitive action.

According to the transport department, all taxi operators, including app-based cab service providers, will have to register themselves with the department.

PTI

Firstpost is now on WhatsApp. For the latest analysis, commentary and news updates, sign up for our WhatsApp services. Just go to Firstpost.com/Whatsapp and hit the Subscribe button.