Taiwan looking to ditch nuclear power?

The nuclear power industry turns out to be just as corrupt as Big Pharma

(NaturalNews) The Fukushima crisis continues to worsen by the day, with nuclear experts around the world finally realizing and admitting we've all been lied to. "I think maybe the situation is much more serious than we were led to believe," said Najmedin Meshkati of the University of Southern California, in a Reuters report ( http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/03/27/ja... ). That same article revealed that recent radiation readings at Fukushima show "contamination 100,000 times normal in water at reactor No. 2 and 1,850 times normal in the nearby sea."Massachusetts rainwater has also been found to be contaminated with low levels of radiation from Fukushima, indicating just how widespread the radioactive fallout has become. It's not just the West Coast of North America that's vulnerable, in other words: even the East Coast could receive dangerous levels of fallout if Fukushima suffers a larger release of radioactive material into the air.Rolling blackouts are now continuing throughout Japan due to the drop in power production from Fukushima diminishing Japan's electricity generating capacity ( http://english.kyodonews.jp/news/2011/03/813... ). The only reason Japan isn't experiencingright now is because so many factories were damaged or swept away from the tsunami itself. Once a serious rebuilding effort gets underway, Japan is going to find itself critically short of electrical power.The radiation leaking from Reactor No. 2 is now measured at-- more than enough to cause someone's hair to fall out from a single exposure event. Radiation sickness can begin at just 100 millisieverts. The extremely high levels of radiation are, in fact, making it nearly impossible for workers to continue working at the reactor. "You'd have a lot of difficulty putting anyone in there," said Richard Wakeford, a radiation epidemiology expert at the Dalton Nuclear Institute in Manchester. "They're finding quite high levels of radiation fields, which is impeding their progress dealing with the situation." ( http://www.businessweek.com/news/2011-03-27/... The worsening Fukushima situation is also starting to spook nearby nations such as, which also depends on nuclear power. The DPP opposition party there announced today that it wanted to see nuclear power phased out by 2025. Taiwan is a relatively small island nation, and a Fukushima-like catastrophe would leave most of the island residents with nowhere to go. And like Japan, Taiwan is also vulnerable to earthquakes and tsunamis (as well as hurricanes).In Germany, massive demonstrations (200,000 people in four large cities) have brought the nuclear safety issue to the forefront, contributing heavily to the defeat of Merkel and the rise to power of thein southwestern Germany ( http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/28/world/euro... ). Germans tend to have very strong opposition to nuclear power, in much the same way that most Europeans despise genetically modified foods.The truth is that, thanks to the corruption, cover-ups and outright deceptions that we're now finding out were behind the Fukushima power plant catastrophe. The nuclear industry, it turns out, is one bigwhere the regulators are deeply in bed with the very industry they're supposed to regulate ( http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527... ).Then again, what rich, powerful industryin bed with its regulators? It's true with Big Pharma and the FDA just as much as it is with the nuclear power industry and its corrupt regulators.That's why Big Government never really works: Most of the regulators who are supposed to protect the people inevitably end up operating as. This entire Fukushima incident is a direct result of that deep-rooted corruption coming back to haunt humanity.Watch for more reporting on this incident here at NaturalNews.com, and subscribe to our daily email alerts to be kept up to date on the situation: https://www.naturalnews.com/ReaderRegistratio... The Fukushima situation is nowhere near over. Now regulators are saying this might take not justorto sort out, but evento fully rectify.The half life of plutonium, it turns out, is a whole lot longer than the entire history of human civilization (24,000 years) ( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plutonium ). We would be wise to remember what we're playing with when we attempt to harness the power of fission.