I promised that I would publish a review of all the reusable baby food pouches that I’ve tested. I have been really pleased with the responses to my inquires. I’ve been introduced to some new companies & products that I have not heard of before and met some really wonderful people thorough this project. Since this first project also centers around two of my favorite things, cooking & my son, it has been especially enjoyable for me.

Because this was such an extensive project, and I’ve tried to provide as much information as I possible could in order to enable you to make an informed decision I have broken this post into three parts.

I tested all of the pouches with various thicknesses of purees in them to see how easy they were to fill and feed from. Each of the recipes I used are published on this site so you can reproduce them as well. I also tested some of the pouches with jarred baby food, a friend of mine has a 14 month old who spends a lot of time at my house and they always drop her off with jarred food to eat. Since it is difficult to feed two babies at once I use the reusable pouches and put her food into them so she can feed herself. She thinks it is more fun to eat from the pouch and it works quit well. She is on to advanced stages of purees so some of her food even has pieces of pasta etc, and I’ve had no problems with her getting the food out. You can’t use an attachable spoon if there are solid pieces, obviously, but she has no problem sucking right out of the pouches. So if you are a mom with your hands full with multiples or you babysit multiple children and need a solution to feeding everyone at once, you can use the pouches even if you aren’t making all your own baby food.

I rate the thickness of the purees that each pouch can hold as follows:

Thin – a very liquid puree like Pumpkin Yogurt Smoothies or Banana Yogurt

Medium-Thin – slightly thicker but more solid such as Banana & Avocado

Medium-Thick – thick puree with very little liquid such as Minty Green Peas or Applesauce

Thick – Very thick no liquid at all such as Sweet Potatoes

Thickness is important with the reusable pouches because if your puree is too thick for that type of pouch then you will have problems with the puree bursting out of the closure.

I have tried to provide as much information as possible on each item tested so that you can decide which one will fit your needs the best. A few items I might mention in the reviews I owned previous to starting this project but I want to thank the follow companies and people for providing me with items to test in exchange for this honest review:

Michelle with Squishy Snak Pak

Ali with BooginHead

Maggie with Little Green Pouch

Laura with ReSqueeze Reusable Food Pouch

And Nourish with Style Pouches

Additional information about this product test is provided in Part Two & Three of this review.