Disclaimer: I do not own Hyperdimension Neptunia or any of its material which includes, but is not limited to, characters, setting, and/or items, which are owned by their respective owners.

All preparations were complete. Dimensional tethers were strong and stable. Containment forcefield energy at one-hundred percent. Safety goggles on. Schedule for the next three weeks emptied. Pudding stock for Neptune refilled. Nepgear ensured nothing could possibly interrupt her sensitive experiment, for any lapse in concentration would mean the destruction of not one, but two entire dimensions.

Her goal today was to create a portal between her dimension and another. The conventional method of using magic and share energy took too long and was unreliable, so she searched for another way of creating multidimensional portals using technology. With the help of her own observations of the portal between her and Plutia's worlds and notes she "borrowed" from MAGES. (she would return them later), Nepgear created her prototype portal. Today was the day of its initial test run.

In order to ensure that the experiment will stop before anything unexpected occurs, Nepgear decided to slowly feed power into the portal. As she steadily cranked the power supply on, the conglomeration of wires and metal molded into the shape of a ring began to hum quietly. Sparks began to erupt from the center of the ring, then the dimensional fabric opened into a small, circular rift. Nepgear continued to crank the lever on the generator up, from level 4 to level 5. As the machine received more power, the portal it created began to expand. All was going according to plan.

"Hiya, Nep Jr.! What'cha doin' in your lab!" Neptune suddenly barged in, literally kicking the door off its hinges. "Oopsies! I'll fix that later."

"W-What the goodness!" Nepgear exclaimed, being startled by her older sister. Unknowingly, she also cranked the lever past level 10 onto the hastily scribbled level 11. The portal within the machine suddenly expanded and began acting like a vortex, sucking in the air around and its machine. By the time Nepgear noticed her experiment had gone wrong, the forcefield generator within her laboratory had already been sucked into the vortex.

"Ooo! Nep Jr., are you trying to create a black hole? It would make cleaning the basilicom much faster." Neptune remarked.

"Oh no… Sis, this isn't the time for jokes! You have to get out of here!" Nepgear yelled, shoving Neptune out of the room. However, before Nepgear herself could escape, the vortex sucked the unhinged door right into her face, taking her, the door, and the power generator inside of itself. With no power or machine left to sustain it, the vortex closed with a blinding flash of light, the dimensional fabric repairing itself.

"Nepgear? Nepgear!" Neptune hastily dashed into the lab she was shoved out of, and found Nepgear and a beam saber where the vortex was. She was missing her safety goggles. "Wake up, Nepgear! Speak to me!"

"Ngh… Neptune?" Nepgear came to her senses and looked around. The tile was scorched from what appeared to be an explosion that centered on her. The room appeared to be empty save for her, her beam saber, and Neptune, who was currently holding Nepgear in her arms. "What happened? I remember a portal expanding while I was doing some lab work."

"We'll worry about that later, sis. For now, we need to get you some rest." Neptune helped Nepgear get up, and the two exited the now barren room.

"Thank you, little sis."

Nepgear awoke. Her safety goggles were covered in soot, so she lifted them from her eyes and onto her head. She looked around. She was on her laboratory door, and bits of charred scrap metal and frayed wiring were strewn about in the room she was in. She stood up and dusted herself off. She then heard the sound of desperate knocking from the hinged door.

"Nepgear, open up! I heard a loud noise. What happened in there?" Neptune yelled through the door, her voice getting muffled in the process. She then proceed to kick the door open without tearing it from its hinges.

"Everything was going fine, Neptune, until you barged in," Nepgear replied.

"I didn't do anything this time! Maybe the fumes in the lab and the office are making you hallucinate. You'll be as right as sunshine after a nice bath and a dose of pudding. You've been working two laps around the clock, and Dr. Nep says that is unhealthy," Neptune uttered her rant without taking a breath, and Nepgear was unable to get a single word in.

Nepgear tensed up as Neptune attempted to drag her out of the room, presumably to a bath and pudding. "Relax for once, Nepgear, we can talk about what happened later."

"O-Okay. Thank you, big sis."

Author's Notes:

Phew, first chapter under the belt! A little ambitious for my first fanfic to not be a oneshot, but I could not focus on anything else with this in my head. Feedback would be appreciated!