Oy. All the wackadoodles came out for Eileen Davidson‘s poker night on Real Housewives of Beverly Hills last night. Poor Eileen. And poor Kyle Richards for having to deal with both the drunk wackadoodle Brandi Glanville and the high wackadoodle Kim Richards. I think it’s safe to say that this is the episode which will set the tone for the rest of season five. Sadly. Kyle took to her blog to share her feelings about the turn of events.

Kyle said poker night felt “extremely uncomfortable” from the very beginning. “I could see Kim was ‘off’ but wasn’t quite sure how to handle the situation. One thing that was very clear to me watching this is that Brandi is not my friend. Never has been. I have tried to give her the benefit of the doubt but always kept her at arms length. To see her pretending to be friends with me in the car ride to Eileen‘s then turning on me made things abundantly clear to me. Brandi can’t be a friend to anyone. Including my sister.”

CLICK CONTINUE READING FOR MORE!

Kyle went on to say that Brandi has mistaken concern for Kim as jealousy.

“Brandi clearly has been driving a wedge between my sister and me, which seems to have been her master plan from the beginning. Her comments about me always being jealous of Kim‘s career couldn’t be further from the truth. That is not how we were raised. My mom always taught us that any success the three of us had (Kathy, Kim, and Kyle) was a ‘feather in all our caps.'”

“As a child, you aren’t thinking of your career. In fact, often I would hate that I had to work, because I would be missing something like a friend’s birthday party. Brandi pretending she knows us, our history, or anything about our relationship is hurtful and frustrating. She is a new person in our lives whom we have no history with. She makes these comments to be mean and cause Kim to question her relationship with me. Apparently it’s working.”

About Kim‘s confession, Kyle admitted that she felt disappointed, but she was glad Kim was open and honest about it. “We hugged and left the bathroom, and I thought everything was OK between us. My sister has been under a lot of pressure taking care of her ex-husband, Monty. If she had slipped, it would have been understandable, and the fact that we had talked about it made me feel better. Next thing I know Kim says to me ‘thanks for doing that,’ says she is leaving, and is clearly upset with me.”

Kyle explained her side of the story on the physical altercation with Brandi.

“Kim being mad at me made no sense, which made me more concerned for the situation and her well-being. I wanted to pull her away from everyone to speak privately but Brandi wasn’t allowing us to, as though she somehow needed to ‘protect’ my sister from me, when clearly my sister needed a loved one to make sure she was OK. Brandi was putting her arm up and blocking me from being able to talk to my sister. Many things are going through my head at this point: concern for my sister and our relationship that we have worked so hard on and the fear that a manageable (yet concerning) situation might spiral out of control, because one person seemed to be using it to her advantage in a dangerous way.”

“I was extremely frustrated that this person, who is not family or anyone I consider close, is keeping me from my sister. She put her arm up to block me, and I first said, ‘Please don’t do that.’ I then pushed her arm down to stop her from blocking me from Kim. As Kim was leaving and Brandi was walking out with her and blocking me, I pulled her arm back to stop her from keeping Kim and me apart. I simply wanted to get to my sister out of concern. The last person I wanted Kim with was a drunk Brandi.”

“It is very clear to me that Brandi takes advantage of Kim when she is at her most vulnerable and wants her to believe that she is the only one that cares or understands her. Brandi also is using my sister to look like she is taking care of Kim and distracting us from Brandi’s own obvious issues,” concluded Kyle. “This was the end of Brandi’s and my friendship. And the beginning of another bumpy road in Kim’s and my relationship.”

Kyle made a lot of good points in her blog. I, too, believe Brandi manipulated Kim, and it makes me sick to my stomach. My father is an addict – never been sober my entire life – so I empathize with Kyle. It’s not easy. And the last thing anyone in that family needs is a manipulative, enabling, obnoxious drunk in the way. Shoo, Brandi! Shoo!

TELL US – DO YOU AGREE WITH KYLE’S TAKE ON THE EPISODE?

Photo Credit: Charles Sykes/Bravo

REALITY TEA’S COMMENT POLICY