It’s Friday, friday, gotta get sales on friday! (I’m not sorry >:D) Yep! It’s Friday again, and that means it’s time for Fi*Fridays and Fifty Linden Fridays! I have some fantastic deals to tell you about today!

We all know and love Glam Affair skins, but sometimes a fancy brand-new GA skin can be a little out of our price range (especially for those of you who are new to SL) but it’s okay because this fierce skin I’m wearing is just 50L$ for FLF! This awesome rendition of the Mokatana skin comes in America tone and features artsy eyeliner and glossy red lips, but you’re not just getting one skin in a box! Mokatana Star comes with all the brow colour options you could possibly need, various eyebrow shapers to give different looks and two versions of beauty mark tattoos! All that for 50L$, you’d be crazy not to take advantage of this deal!

I mentioned Fi*fridays before but in case you’ve forgotten, it’s a big store full of a bunch of items from various designers, all priced at 55L$. There’s everything from skins, shoes, makeup, handbags, jewellery, clothing, menswear and even furniture! I nabbed this cute peplum blazer from InSight in both colours, the striped you see here and a plain black one. Rock it with a pencil skirt for business chic or a pair of jeans for something a little more casual.

And pair it with jeans I did because I found these amazing jeans on the marketplace for just 90L$. I know what you’re thinking ‘what’s so special about a pair of 90L$ jeans?’. Well maybe the fact that it comes with a colour change HUD with over 150 options? In fact, inventory management-lovers will be drooling over the entire store! Alyce makes some really nice clothing and even shoes for slink feet with a huge amount of colour options and for really really cheap. I don’t think I’ll ever have to buy another pair of jeans again.

Finally, these cute boots are Fri.day’s release for the Enchantment event coming tomorrow Unlike a lot of Fri.day’s new shoes, these ones don’t require you to have Slink feet! The hunter boots are available in a bunch of earthy colours during the event but like everything at Enchantment, will never be sold again after the event so best be on your toes!

*X*

Advertisements