For the first time, Starz will air all 29 episodes of SPARTACUS in chronological order, beginning with "Gods of the Arena," then "Blood and Sand," and concluding with "Vengeance," Friday nights from 9pm - 11pm ET/PT, beginning June 8th.

"Spartacus: Gods of the Arena"

Episodes to air June 8 & 15

June 8 9pm Past Transgressions

10pm Missio

11pm Paterfamilias

June 15 9pm Beneath The Mask

10pm Reckoning

11pm The Bitter End (Series Finale)

The House of Batiatus is on the rise, basking in the glow of its infamous champion Gannicus (Dustin Clare), whose skill with a sword is matched only by his thirst for wine and women. These are the times a young Batiatus has been waiting for. Poised to overthrow his father and take control; he'll freely betray anyone to ensure his gladiators are in the highest demand. And he'll have his loyal and calculating wife Lucretia by his side for every underhanded scheme, drawing on the brazen talents of her seductive friend Gaia when it counts. Together, they will stop at nothing to deceive the masses, seize power, and bleed Capua dry.

"Spartacus: Blood and Sand"

Episodes to air June 22, 29 and July 6, 13, 20

June 22 9pm The Red Serpent

10pm Sacramentum Gladiatorum

11pm Legends

June 29 9pm The Thing In The Pit

10pm Shadow Games

11pm Delicate Things

July 6 9pm Great And Unfortunate Things

10pm Mark Of The Brotherhood

11pm Whore

July 13 9pm Party Favors

10pm Old Wounds

11pm Revelations

July 20 9pm Kill Them All (Series Finale)

Betrayed by the Romans. Forced into slavery. Reborn as a Gladiator. Torn from his homeland and the woman he loves, Spartacus (Andy Whitfield) is condemned to the brutal world of the arena where blood and death are primetime entertainment. But not all battles are fought upon the sands. Treachery, corruption, and the allure of sensual pleasures will constantly test Spartacus. To survive, he must become more than a man. More than a gladiator. He must become a legend.

"Spartacus: Vengeance"

Episodes to air July 20, 27 and August 3, 10

July 20 10pm Fugitivus

11pm A Place In This World

July 27 9pm The Greater Good

10pm Empty Hands

11pm Libertus

August 3 9pm Chosen Path

10pm Sacramentum

11pm Balance

August 10 9pm Monsters

10pm Wrath Of The Gods (Series Finale)

On the heels of the bloody escape from the House of Batiatus, the gladiator rebellion continues and begins to strike fear into the heart of the Roman Republic. Gaius Claudius Glaber and his Roman troops are sent to Capua to crush the growing band of freed slaves that Spartacus (Liam McIntyre) leads before it can inflict further damage. Spartacus is presented the choice of satisfying his personal need for vengeance against the man that condemned his wife to slavery and eventual death, or making the larger sacrifices necessary to keep his budding army from breaking apart.

The "Spartacus" series is executive produced by Rob Tapert (The Grudge, "Xena: Warrior Princess" and "Hercules: The Legendary Journeys"), Steven S. DeKnight ("Buffy the Vampire Slayer"), Sam Raimi (Spider-Man and The Evil Dead), and Joshua Donen (The Quick and the Dead).

About Starz Entertainment

Starz Entertainment, LLC, is a premium movie and original programming entertainment service provider operating in the United States. The company offers 17 premium channels including the flagship STARZ(R) and ENCORE(R) brands with approximately 20.1 million and 33.6 million subscribers respectively. Starz Entertainment airs in total more than 1,000 movies and original series every month across its pay TV channels. Starz Entertainment is recognized as a pay TV leader in providing HD, On Demand, HD On Demand and online advanced services for its STARZ, ENCORE and MOVIEPLEX brands. Starz Entertainment (www.starz.com) is an operating unit of Starz, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Liberty Media Corporation (NASDAQ: LMCA).

Related Articles View More TV Stories