Welcome to London, Jack Roslovic.

The Winnipeg Jets’ freshly-signed first-rounder stopped by Budweiser Gardens Wednesday for what his trusted advisor called more of an "acclimation visit" with the Knights rather than a formal recruiting pitch.

The defending Memorial Cup champions own the American star forwards’ OHL rights after acquiring them from the Flint Firebirds earlier this summer.

"I don’t know if we need to immediately sign on the dotted line, but things are moving in that direction," said Ken Robinson of New York-based Edge Sports, which handles the American star forward’s hockey affairs. "Should he land there (in London), I think he’ll do great.

"It’ll be a great fit."

The Knights organized a meet-and-greet for Roslovic with their hockey operations staff and showed off the club’s dressing room, weight room and the 9,000-seat building.

"I think (the rink) is phenomenal," Robinson said. "Jack’s going to love it. It’s a lot different than playing in a 16,000-seat arena where 3,000 of those seats are filled. Sometimes, that’s what college hockey is.

"Should he end up there (in London), he’s really going to enjoy that environment."

Roslovic has three options this fall. He can make the Jets out of training camp, play for their American league affiliate Manitoba Moose or be a top-line threat with the Knights.

Since signing with Winnipeg this week, he is ineligible to return to the University of Miami-Ohio. The 19-year-old from Columbus co-led the RedHawks in scoring as as freshman last season.

"Certainly, Winnipeg appreciated that (OHL) option for Jack," Robinson said. "We don’t know where Jack’s going to end up. That’s entirely up to the Jets organization. But he thought he was going back to college at the beginning of the summer.

"We weren’t expecting the Knights to obtain his rights. Nevertheless, that was what Basil (former London GM Basil McRae) thought was the thing to do."

The Knights struck out on offensively-talented American Sonny Milano after acquiring his major junior rights before the January trade deadline last season. The world junior bronze medalist stayed in Cleveland and won the American league’s Calder Cup with the Lake Erie Monsters.

Roslovic is, according to Robinson, a "very close comparison to Sonny at this point in terms of age and pedigree."

The Jets didn’t have much conversation with him about a contract until he shone at the NHL team’s recent development camp

"They liked what they saw," Robinson said. "College hockey did for Jack what he and Winnipeg wanted it to do. He gained 14 pounds of lean muscle and became a lot stronger. He became more physical and that was part of his game that needed some help."

He is a a favourite to crack the American world junior roster this year. Later this month, he will attend USA Hockey’s summer camp along with current Knights Matthew Tkachuk, Max Jones and goalie Tyler Parsons.

They could be teammates at Christmas in Toronto and Montreal and, if their NHL teams decide, all together in London for another title shot.

"Matthew Tkachuk is one’of Jack’s best friends and another of his (minor hockey) teammates is (current Knight) Kole Sherwood," Robinson said. "He certainly knows what’s going on and he was impressed with last season and the history of the London Knights.

"It (where he fits best) is a discussion we will have with the Jets and we’ll look very carefully after pre-season (NHL) camp and a game or two.

"No one’s rushing his development at this point."

rpyette@postmedia.com

Twitter.com/RyanatLFPress

FUTURE IS NOW

(A look at 2016 Memorial Cup champion London Knights heading to pro camps this fall)

Maple Leafs: Mitch Marner, JJ Piccinich, Nicolas Mattinen

Ducks: Max Jones, Brandon Crawley

Flames: Matthew Tkachuk, Tyler Parsons

Blue Jackets: Jacob Graves, Kole Sherwood

Sabres: Cliff Pu

Canucks: Olli Juolevi

Coyotes: Christian Dvorak

Canadiens: Victor Mete

Hurricanes: Janne Kuokkanen

Stars: Chris Martenet

Penguins: CJ Yakimowicz

Blues: Owen MacDonald

Islanders: Aaron Berisha (signed by AHL affiliate Bridgeport Sound Tigers)