Since free VPN services generally lack quality and reliability that a premium subscription offers, buying a cheap VPN service is the best option for users on budget. More so, free VPN services generally offer simple browser extensions that only secure browsing activities and do not protect other data. Cheap VPN services that we selected encrypt not only browsing activities, but offer a full VPN service to secure bitTorrent traffic, messaging, e-mail clients along with all communication tunneled through a device.

Even though VPN subscription is generally not too expensive, prices typically vary from $3 to $15 on monthly subscriptions, and $30 to $150 on annual accounts. The pricing depends on a combination of factors such as a number of servers and protocols, desktop and mobile custom apps, speed and reliability, advanced protection features and more. And while there are plenty of cheap VPN providers, quality of service, reliability and trustworthiness is paramount.

Having reviewed dozens of leading VPN services, we compiled a list of affordable VPN providers that, despite their cheap price, manage to deliver an excellent VPN protection to their users.



Get 75% off NordVPN

MONTHLY PRICE: 11.95 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 2.99 USD/mo

Panama based NordVPN is one of the best security oriented VPN companies with amazingly fast infrastructure. NordVPN offers over 5,000 servers in 62 countries, dedicated & shared IP types, and 6 simultaneous logins. NordVPN has a Smart Play technology offering an encrypted connection to access geo-restricted content on Netflix, Hulu, Pandora, BBC iPlayer and similar services. NordVPN implemented a strict no logs privacy policy, offers double data encryption, obfuscation tools and other advanced security features. Their custom apps run on system startup include Kill Switch feature and DNS leak resolver to protect the user from unexpected data leaks. To read a full NordVPN review and get an annual discount click HERE.

Get 81% off CyberGhost VPN

MONTHLY PRICE: 12.99 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 2.50 USD/mo

Romania based CyberGhost is a no logs VPN provider with over 3,500 high speed VPN servers. CyberGhost offers streaming servers to unblock Netflix, Hulu, BBC iPlayer as well as secure torrenting servers. For faster streaming and torrenting CyberGhost VPN allows switching between TCP/UDP protocols. VPN provider offers desktop and mobile apps with built-in advanced security features such as automatic kill switch, DNS & IP leaks, anti-fingerprinting and tracking protection, an ad-blocker and anti-malware. To read a full CyberGhost review click HERE.

Get 58% off PIA VPN

MONTHLY PRICE: 6.95 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 2.91 USD/mo

PIA is a leading no logs VPN provider with a massive amount of servers (over 3,000) that deliver excellent speeds and a very reliable service. PIA VPN does a great job protecting users’ privacy from surveillance, cyber attacks and other online threats. PIA network is protected behind NAT Firewall. Native apps offer a built-in Kill Switch and DNS leak protection features to secure connection from unexpected data leaks. PIA software also offers switching between UDP and TCP connections types, port forwarding to 443, 80, 110, 53, 8080, 9201. For faster streaming and torrenting, PIA allows using 128-bit or 256-bit encryption levels. To read a full PIA review click HERE.

Get 10% off TorGuard Lifetime Deal

MONTHLY PRICE: 8.99 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 4.49 USD/mo [promocode]

Offering over 3,000 servers in 50 countries, all mainstream protocols and 5 simultaneous connections, TorGuard rightfully earned its place as a top VPN provider. No logs TorGuard offers a reliable, fast and secure VPN connection. Their SOCKS5 proxy is an excellent feature for high speed multimedia streaming and torrenting as it integrates with the main BitTorrent applications. TorGuard native apps offer advanced security features like Kill Switch to ensure no data leaks, even when the connection drops, and port forwarding to custom TCP/UDP ports. TorGuard’s StealthVPN protocol is an effective tool to bypass strict firewalls and VPN blocking. To read a full TorGuard review click HERE.

Get 73% off PureVPN

MONTHLY PRICE: 10.95 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 2.99 USD/mo

Hong Kong based PureVPN is a proud owner of a massive 2,000 servers network in over 140 countries with over 60 server locations specifically optimized for torrenting. PureVPN is a fast and reliable VPN provider with exclusive streaming servers to unblock Netflix, Hulu and similar services. PureVPN online gaming VPN servers are dedicated for gamers’ traffic only. Low ping offered by optimized PureVPN servers make it possible for gaming and streaming users to enjoy entertainment with the fastest load time. Secure PureVPN infrastructure is protected behind NAT Firewall. PureVPN offers custom apps for all devices, while desktop apps have a built-in Kill Switch feature that guards the users from unencrypted data leaks when the internet connection drops. To read a full PureVPN review click HERE.

Get 53% off Trust.Zone VPN

MONTHLY PRICE: 7.99 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 3.33 USD/mo

No logs Trust.Zone is a Seychelles based VPN provider with user privacy as their foremost priority. Since Trust.Zone is a VPN service launched by one of the largest torrenting websites ExtraTorrent, it’s no wonder they are one of the best providers for p2p file sharing. Their apps have DNS, WebRTC leaks protection, Kill Switch and port-forwarding features. To read a full Trust.Zone review click HERE.

Get 76% off Hotspot Shield VPN

MONTHLY PRICE: 12.99 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 2.99 USD/mo

Hotspot Shield is the largest no logs VPN provider serving tens of millions of users. Hotspot Shield has dedicated VPN software for Windows, Mac, iPhone, Android and even Windows Phone. The app allows users to split tunnel only selected websites via VPN while other browsing activities will continue using standard internet connection. Torrenting is allowed and streaming speeds are excellent as well. To read a full Hotspot Shield review click HERE.

Go to CactusVPN Website

MONTHLY PRICE: 4.99 USD

ANNUAL PRICE: 3.24 USD/mo

Moldova based CactusVPN supports OpenVPN, IPsec, SSTP, PPTP and SoftEther protocols with servers in USA, UK, Netherlands and Romania. Their pricing plans are tailored for specific purposes: torrenting, SmartDNS, US and UK. Cactus released custom apps for Mac, Windows and iOS and allows 3 simultaneous connections. To read a full CactusVPN review click HERE.