They’re still with her.

Get push notifications with news, features and more.

Former Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton received an overwhelming outpouring of support when she made a surprise appearance at the UNICEF Snowflake Ball in Manhattan on Tuesday night, just three weeks after losing the 2016 election.

The former secretary of state was on hand at the charity gala to present Katy Perry with the Audrey Hepburn Children’s Fund’s Audrey Hepburn Humanitarian Award. Clinton was smiling from ear to ear as she took the stage to Perry’s hit song “Roar.” But before she could even speak, Clinton was greeted with a standing ovation and chants of “Still with her! Still with her!”

It took several moments for Clinton to quiet the crowd as audience members shouted, “Hillary!” and “We love you!”

Kevin Mazur/Getty

“[Katy] has the spirit and the energy and the compassion that Audrey Hepburn brought to her work for UNICEF,” Clinton said in her introduction. “We need champions like Katy now more than ever. We need her passion, her energy, and, yes, her voice – ‘louder than a lion.’ We all know Katy as a global mega-star. The powerful voice who reminds us: When you get knocked down, get back up.”

Clinton added of Perry’s work with the organization:“She has been a goodwill ambassador for UNICEF since 2013, she has traveled the world advocating for the rights and needs of children, she has visited some of the poorest places on Earth and lent her voice to kids who would otherwise be voiceless from remote villages to Vietnam and Madagascar. She has put a spotlight on child poverty and encouraged the empowerment of women and girls.”

WATCH: Hillary Clinton Drowned Out By Fans Shouting ‘We’re With Her!’ at UNICEF Ball for Katy Perry

Video courtesy of Michele Noble

Perry, one of Clinton’s most vocal celebrity supporters throughout her presidential campaign, was moved to tears by the former secretary of state’s surprise introduction. When Perry joined Clinton on stage to accept the award, the two women embraced, and Clinton told Perry, “I’m so proud of you.”

Kevin Mazur/Getty

Perry returned Clinton’s praise in her acceptance speech, thanking the former secretary of state for inspiring her to use her voice for a good cause.

“I’ve always had a voice – a singing voice – but I’ve never had a voice like I’ve had before. Hillary has lit that voice inside of me, and that light will never go out, it will continue to get brighter and brighter and brighter,” Perry said. “Thank you, Hillary. You motivate me and so many millions of people,” she expressed.

Caryl M. Stern, the president and CEO of the U.S. Fund for UNICEF, expressed her gratitude for both Clinton and Perry’s work with the organization in an exclusive statement to PEOPLE.

“Children need dedicated, passionate champions now more than ever, and we were so thankful that Secretary Clinton joined us in honoring Katy Perry’s incredible work for the world’s children,” she said. “This year’s UNICEF Snowflake Ball was a powerful reminder of our collective ability to put children first.”