A Capitol Christmas tree is shown. | John Shinkle/POLITICO | John Shinkle/POLITICO Congress inaugurates a Christmas tree tradition, Dec. 24, 1913

On this day in 1913, thousands of people came to the U.S. Capitol to celebrate Washington’s first “community Christmas.” The centerpiece of the festivities, a 40-foot Norway spruce Christmas tree located on the East Front Plaza of the Capitol, was adorned with red, white and blue electric bulbs.

The celebration also boasted a lighted placard with the inscription, “Peace on earth, good will to men” and nativity scenes, and featured a chorus whose members sang Christmas hymns. During the Christmas Eve celebration, the U.S. Marine Band played the national anthem.

Story Continued Below

The holiday tradition resumed in December 1914. But it ended the next year due to a lack of funds. “Shock Awaits Santa Claus: No Community Christmas Tree Will Be at the Capitol for Him,” a Washington Post headline read.

Nearly a half-century later, in 1962, House Speaker John McCormack (D-Mass.) supervised the placement of an indoor Christmas tree in Statuary Hall.

It is “most appropriate that a Christmas tree be placed in the Capitol, which is [at] the heart of legislative activity of our country,” McCormack said. A year later, he spearheaded the revival of an official Capitol Christmas Tree when he suggested that the architect of the Capitol plant a tree on the West Front lawn. That tradition continued, and the next year, on Dec. 18, 1964, Sen. Carl Hayden (D-Ariz.), the Senate’s president pro tempore, lit the 25-foot Douglas-fir “congressional” tree decorated with white lights and topped with a star.

Since 1970 — after two unsuccessful attempts to plant trees on the West Front lawn — the U.S. Forest Service and the architect’s office have selected a Capitol Christmas Tree from a rotating group of U.S. national forests. In recent years, an annual ceremony has been held in early December, during which the House speaker presides over the lighting of the Capitol Tree.

POLITICO Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight, every weekday morning — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Accordingly, on Dec. 6, 2017, House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) presided over this year’s lighting of the Capitol Christmas Tree. The tree had been transported to the Capitol from Montana’s Kootenai National Forest. During the ceremony, Ryan showed Ridley Brandmayr, an 11-year-old Montanan, which switch to flip on the dais that would light the tree.

In brief remarks, Ryan said:

“Amid our cares and troubles, we gather to see for ourselves that the light overcomes the darkness. We seek out the joy and the good in the world. We give back to those in need. We lend a hand to those in pain.

“We see that the glory of God shines all around us, and brings us closer to one another. These gifts never dim in our hearts. They are always there. All we need is a little light—and of course, a little Christmas—to guide our path.”

The tree will remain lit from nightfall until 11 p.m. each evening through New Year’s Day.

SOURCE: HISTORY.HOUSE.GOV

