Following up on its flagship G4 announcement for 2015, LG is now supplementing its lineup as it does every year with more midrange options that can appeal to and target different audiences: a larger phablet with a stylus for a Note-like approach and a smaller less powerful variant of its star player.

Let's start with the G4 Stylus. It comes with a larger 5.7" display than the G4, albeit with a lower 720p resolution that results in a rather average 258ppi. It has drawn the short end of the stick on other specs as well, coming with 1GB of RAM and 8GB of internal storage, but there will be two variants: a 3G one and an LTE one. Oddly, the former has a more powerful 1.4GHz octa-core processor (and an 8MP camera) while the latter has a 1.2GHz quad-core processor (and a 13MP camera). The G4 Stylus packs LG's "Rubberdium Stylus" for drawing and noting on the screen, has the G4's Laser Autofocus camera, and comes in silver or white.

If the specs and design sound slightly familiar, it's because we've already met the Korean and North American version of this phone (seemingly the 3G-only variant), dubbed G Stylo. It was already released on Boost Mobile, it's coming to Sprint in June, and should be headed to T-Mobile as well.

Next up is the G4c, a more pocketable G4 alternative. It has a 5" 720p display (294ppi), the same 1GB of RAM and 8GB of internal storage as the G4 Stylus, a 1.2GHz quad-core processor, and an 8MP rear camera. There will be no 3G-only variant, all G4c phones will have LTE. The G4c's other distinctive feature is its similarity with the G4 in terms of battery cover design — the same ceramic-like pattern is used on its gray, white, and gold models.

Both phones will have a front 5MP shooter, LG's now signature software features — Glance View, Knock Code, and Gesture Shot — and hardware rear buttons for power and volume. They will also keep the company's recently found differentiating factor in terms of removable battery and MicroSD slot for expandable storage.

There's no word on pricing or availability, except that they will be shipping "around the world in the next several weeks," and they're both "exceptionally priced." What that means is open to interpretation.