​The Safer Texas Campaign is offering $10,000 to anyone in Texas who can disprove three statements that demonstrate marijuana is safer than alcohol.

The three claims are:

1. Alcohol is significantly more toxic than marijuana, making death by overdose far more likely with alcohol.

2. The health effects from long-term alcohol consumption cause tens of thousands of more deaths in the U.S. annually than the health effects of the long-term consumption of marijuana.

3. Violent crime committed by individuals intoxicated by alcohol is far more prevalent in the U.S. than violent crime committed by individuals intoxicated with marijuana only.

“We are confident that this $10,000 will not be claimed,” said Safer Texas Campaign manager Craig Johnson.





​”Marijuana is objectively and unquestionably less harmful than alcohol, and these three statements are representative of that fact,” Johnson said. “Alcohol is more toxic than marijuana, more likely to lead to the death of the user — either by overdose or chronic use — and more likely to contribute to violence.”

“For good measure, alcohol is also more addictive than marijuana,” Johnson said. “As we consider whether to reform our marijuana laws, it is important that the people of Texas understand these facts.”

If you believe you can disprove these assertions, well, first of all, you’re mistaken. Ell oh ell.

But if you really think you can disprove the three statements, please send peer-reviewed studies or government statistics that contradict all three to [email protected]

The Safer Texas Campaign says it is not an anti-alcohol campaign, nor does it advocate the use of marijuana.

“However, the campaign works to address increasing public safety concerns that our state laws prohibiting marijuana are sending a dangerous message to the public that alcohol is more acceptable than marijuana, despite the fact that every objective study on alcohol and marijuana has shown marijuana is a much safer substance than alcohol to both the user and to society,” the group said in a statement.