Click here for the Forbes list of The 25 Best Places To Retire In 2014.

Retirement is one of those chances in life to do something really different. With kids usually out of the house, many people look at it as an opportunity to move to a place that better fits their likings and budget---somewhere affordable that's warmer (or colder), more rural (or urban), with good medical care and options for an active life, including perhaps a part-time job.

We’ve identified 25 such communities of varying sizes that retirees and those nearing retirement would do well to consider. These spots are spread across 16 states in all four continental time zones. Four states--Texas, Florida, South Carolina and Pennsylvania--have two or more listings. About three-quarters of our picks are in climates considered warm or moderate. That's not surprising since weather is one factor taken into account, and polls show seniors prefer warm climates. Nevertheless, a number of colder cities made the cut, including Fargo, N.D., Pittsburgh, Pa., and Boise, Idaho.

For the full list, click on the picture above. The listings are in alphabetical order, meaning that all 25 are considered meritorious and not ranked among themselves.

Perhaps surprisingly, only three were on last year's list, although nine graced our earlier or more narrowly focused lists. That's because for 2014, we screened even more locations, took into account additional factors and broadened acceptable ranges for other factors. But our focus remains, as in previous years, the identification of places that offer what we consider good retirement value.

To come up with the best 25, we sifted data on more than 400 cities from every state. The major factors taken into account were economic. These included overall cost of living and home prices as compared to national averages and general state tax climates for retirees (something that Forbes has been tracking for years).

For cost of living, we draw largely on stats from FindTheData.org. For home prices, we primarily use numbers collected by the National Association of Realtors, trulia.com and zillow.com. Although no one element is determinative, cost is a major reason only three places in the expensive Northeast and West Coast make the cut. They are repeat choice Pittsburgh and Best Places list newcomers State College, Pa., and Bellingham, Wash.

If money is truly no object, check out our choices for 25 Top Places To Retire Rich.

If for you, as for most folks, money is a consideration, then you may be hoping to cut your housing costs in retirement. That's a growing challenge since the the median home price across the country is $207,000, up 11% from last year's $186,000. Still, there are bargains out there. Seven places on our list have average prices below $140,000. The lowest is Ogden, Utah, $124,000; followed by Pittsburgh, $130,000; and Clemson, S.C., $135,000. Moreover, only one city on the list has a typical price more than 10% above the average, Bellingham at $266,000.

Cost-of-living is expressed as an index, with 100 being the national average. We generally look for places with indexes no higher than 105. Two on the list are higher: Bellingham, again (109) and Bluffton, S.C. (108). Three places actually have indexes below 90, or more than 10% below the national average: Abilene, Tex. (87), Ogden (88) and Auburn, Ala. (89).

With more and more retirees working at least part-time, we also consider estimates of current and future economic prosperity. These include local unemployment rates as collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and prospects for future growth, as gauged in hundreds of cities by the Milken Institute. For December 2013, the national unemployment rate was 6.7%, down from 7.9% a year before. Only one place on the list has an unemployment rate substantially above the average, Port Saint Lucie, Fla., at 8.1%. All the others are near or below the national norm. Some are way below: Fargo, 2.3%; Morgantown, W.V., and Fredericksburg, Tex., both 3.6%.

Our focus on a state's tax climate for retirees takes into account the notion that what is low tax for retirees isn't always the same as for working-age folks. Nine states don't have a broad-based state income tax--Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Washington and Wyoming. But such states tend to make up for that with other, higher taxes, most notably, higher sales and real estate levies, which can hit seniors harder. On the other hand, many states with income taxes give special breaks to retirees, such as light or no taxation of Social Security and pension benefits, and inheritances. In our view, the best states for retirees from a tax perspective are Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Georgia, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Montana, New Hampshire, New Mexico, Nevada, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Utah and West Virginia.

Seniors rightly worry about physical as well as economic security. So we also give weight to violent crime rates for cities and their surrounding areas as calculated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.We factor in the number of doctors per capita as a proxy for the accessibility of health care.

Today's retirees want to keep fit and active, as well as safe. So we look at ratings for attributes that encourage an active retirement. One we use is Bicycling Magazine's ratings of cities for "bikability". High grades here go to Austin, Boise, Fargo, Charleston, S.C., Pittsburgh and Salt Lake City, Utah. Another is Walkscore.com ratings for walkability, or the ability to shop and get places on foot (great for both exercise and non-reliance on cars). Top scores go to Bellingham, Bluffton, Boise, Brevard, N.C.; Clemson, Fredericksburg and State College. A third measure we use is the assessment by volunteeringinamerica.gov of the extent of adult volunteer activity. Cities placing well here include Austin, Boise, Cape Coral, Fla; Fargo, Ogden, Oklahoma City, Okla.; Pittsburgh and Salt Lake City,

Of course, no nationwide list can take into account your own personal considerations such as wanting to stay near friends and family. Other things this list doesn’t take into account, at least directly, are such intangible qualities as cultural milieu and scenic beauty. But upwards of a half-dozen places on the list could be classified as college towns (Auburn, Austin, Bellingham, Blacksburg, Va.; Clemson, Las Cruces, N.M.; Morgantown and State College), which often afford enhance cultural opportunities for the community. And a fair number of our 25 offer mountain or water environments, including Bellingham, Blacksburg, Bluffton, Boise, Brevard, Cape Coral, Charleston, Ogden, Port Saint Lucie, Salt Lake City and Venice, Fla.

Click here for the Forbes list of The 25 Best Places to Retire in 2014.

Follow William P. Barrett on Twitter @WilliamPBarrett.

WATCH: How To Get Real Return On Your Retirement Account