Get your wheels greased and your short shorts laundered, because our beloved mall in Downtown Norfolk is opening Hampton Roads’ first outdoor roller rink this summer.

It goes June 2 to July 30, and will run every Thursday through Sunday. They will have DJ’d 70s, 80s, and 90s themed nights. The rink will be set up where the ice skating rink is during the winter.

This is quite possibly the best decision a mall has ever made. If I could grow out an afro in preparation for the 70s rollerskating party, I would start growing that afro today.

Tickets will be $12 per person and will include skates.

Get this part: According to the press release, there will be an event in July where “you’ll skate under falling snow and maybe even catch a glimpse of Old St. Nick as he skates to his favorite seasonal tunes.” I’m not positive what that sentence actually means, but I do know that I will be there, rollerskating with Santa in an inexplicable summer snow storm.

Eat the Streets 757 is involved, bringing Food Truck Redoes on Friday nights. There will be popcorn and snow cones.

It’s going to be a great summer, Hampton Roads. Enjoy some Chet Faker. Life is good.

The full schedule of events can be found at ShopMacarthur.com/RollerRink. Event highlights include:

Roller Derby Exhibition Bout

Friday, June 2, 7 p.m.

Watch the Dominion Derby Girls in an Army vs. Navy exhibition bout and enjoy a meet and greet.

Food Truck Rodeos

Fridays from June 2 through July 28, 5 p.m. – 9 p.m.

Eat the Streets 757 will have a rotating line-up of your favorite food trucks every Friday night!

Roller Dance Parties

Thursday through Sunday nights from Friday, June 2 – Sunday, July 30

Join Astro DJ for themed dance parties including hits from the ‘70s, ‘80s, ‘90s, country music, beach music and disco!

Rolling Rainbows to benefit Hampton Roads Pride

Saturday, June 10, 8 p.m. – 11 p.m.

Join MacArthur Center as we celebrate Pride Fest! Drag performers will entertain the crowd from 8:30 p.m. – 10 p.m. and 10 percent of admissions from 8 p.m. – 11 p.m. will be donated to Hampton Roads Pride.

Roller Derby Red Cross Blood Drive

Friday, July 7, 3 p.m. – 7 p.m.

Roller Derby girls have been known to shed a little blood during competition, however, they are coming together for a good cause – a special American Red Cross blood drive.

Roll Over Cancer Survivors Skate with the American Cancer Society

Friday, July 7 from 6 p.m. – 9 p.m.

Join the American Cancer Society for a special skate as we celebrate survivors and raise awareness about cancer.

Christmas in July

Thursday, July 13 – Sunday, July 16

We’re celebrating Christmas in July with nightly falling snow, skating Santa and your favorite holiday tunes. Don’t forget to stop by on Wednesday, July 12 to watch “Elf!”

Facebook Comments