Get the biggest football stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

David Moyes is facing a shocking financial situation at Sunderland that could determine his future.

The Sunderland boss is still far from certain to stay on despite a "very good" opening round of talks with owner Ellis Short.

The cash crisis facing the club has been laid bare – and it will hamper Moyes’ wish to to rebuild for promotion in the Championship.

It emerged today that Sunderland are £137m in debt, £68m of bank loans and £69m to Short.

They are paying £7m a year in interest payments, and had a £83m wage bill according to accounts to July 31, 2016.

(Image: Action Images via Reuters)

(Image: PA Wire)

(Image: Reuters)

It was aso revealed the club gave former MD Margaret Byrne, who departed after the Adam Johnson scandal, an £850,000 pay off.

Unless Short pumps more of his cash, bouncing back at the first attempt will be difficult and Moyes knows that.

He has suffered chants asking for him to quit, but says Short and MD Martin Bain want him to stay in charge.

Moyes hinted that he could stay on but said: “I'll know more come the end of the season, once we see exactly what we're able to deal with, what we can work with, then we'll know exactly what we can do.

(Image: Getty)

“All I have done is go in and talk about some of the things that have gone on in the past and how we look to address it in the present. We have not nailed down everything because we have only had an initial conversation.

“I want to be able to have a team which would come straight back up. When we get to the end we will have another conversation.

Moyes has been criticised for admitting last August the club was in a relegation fight.

He explained: “When I look back on it I was very honest, forthright, told people what I thought.

(Image: PA Wire)

(Image: Getty)

"I came to a part of the country where, I was led to believe, that was the way people wanted speaking to. I told them exactly.

"We'd been in a relegation battle the four previous seasons. You want managers to tell the truth and I do."

Sunderland have ten out of contract players and three loans with future in doubt.

Moyes added: "We can only lose the ones who are out of contract. Jordan Pickford is in contract so there's nothing to say we'll lose Jordan.”

Star man Jermain Defoe has a clause saying he can leave on a free because they are relegated.