Alok Mukherjee has not adequately responded to outrage over a Facebook post that suggests police pose a greater threat to Americans than terrorists, says Mayor John Tory, denouncing the police board chairman’s “error in judgment” as a “regrettable” one.

Mr. Tory would not say if Mr. Mukherjee still has his confidence after sharing a post by activist group Occupy Wall Street that states: “Americans killed by ISIS:3, Americans killed by Ebola: 2, Americans killed by the police: 500+ every year.”

Mr. Mukherjee appeared to have added the comment “I can’t breathe”! to the Facebook post, which were the words uttered by Eric Garner, a black man who died after being placed in a chokehold by police in New York. The words were repeated by protesters this week after a grand jury decided not to indict the white officer involved.

The police union has called on Mr. Mukherjee to resign.

I think it’s regrettable; I think it just inflames situations here, in Toronto, that don’t need to be inflamed

In a statement, Mr. Mukherjee said he “very much regret[s] the reaction caused by my posting” but did not apologize.

Mr. Tory said that’s not good enough, and he plans to talk about it further at an upcoming meeting of the police board, of which he is now a member.

“I think this was an error in judgement. I think it’s regrettable; I think it just inflames situations here, in Toronto, that don’t need to be inflamed,” the mayor told reporters on Friday.

“I think our police service is doing an excellent job. It’s not perfect, but I think it’s doing an excellent job and I think there are inferences that can be taken from what’s been put up.”

Mr. Tory added that he isn’t sure the statement Mr. Mukherjee made fully acknowledges his error. “It isn’t just about the reaction, it’s about what was done to provoke the reaction, so I think there’s more discussion to be had,” he said. “It remains to be seen what more needs to be done about this, if anything.”

In his statement, Mr. Mukherjee stressed that “the item was shared as a topic of interest, intended to encourage conversation and reflection. The share was not meant as an endorsement of any views contained. It was not intended to be a negative commentary in any way on members of our police service or on our practices.”

He said he was “very proud” of Toronto’s approach to policing and has the “utmost respect” for officers.

Police union president Mike McCormack called the board chairman’s response “laughable” and said his organization has filed an official complaint with the premier, the mayor, the board and the Ontario Civilian Police Commission.

“Mukherjee’s obvious disdain for police, apparent lack of judgment and his personal agenda discredits and compromises the integrity not only of the board he chairs but the Toronto police service itself,” the police association stated.

But Mr. Mukherjee was defended by Councillor Michael Thompson, the former vice-chairman of the police board, who said the union is trying to stir up controversy in anticipation of contract talks.

“It’s absolute nonsense,” Mr. Thompson said, adding that Mr. Mukherjee’s post had nothing to do with Toronto police. “Quite frankly, the chair should not resign, and it would be to the police association’s advantage if the chair were to resign and that’s really what this is all about.

“They’re afraid of the tough negotiations that the chair has put in place.”

Mr. McCormack said the police outrage has nothing to do with negotiations, and everything to do with leadership. “We didn’t start this,” he said.

National Post

• Email: nalcoba@nationalpost.com | Twitter: nataliealcoba