Dermatophytes are fungi that use keratin for their nutrition and may cause infections of the nails, skin, and hair, known as dermatophytosis. These organisms are classified into three genera: Epidermophyton, Trichophyton, and Microsporum[1]. Although not life-threatening, superficial mycoses due to dermatophytes have been among the most common communicable diseases of humans since antiquity, and have considerable social and health-economic implications [2].

Generally, dermatophytes infect the superficial layers of skin. However, immunocompromised patients, such as AIDS patients or recipients of kidney transplants, can be affected by deep injury in the dermal layer, resulting in disseminated lesions that may take fatal forms [3]-[6]. Although many antifungals are available, their side effects and drug interactions, and the existence of resistant organisms have created a need to find safer and more effective treatments [7]. Also, dermatophytosis treatments are, in general, expensive and must be applied over long periods.

Natural products have proven to be an alternative source of new active molecules. In many countries, mainly in developing countries, plants have been used as the primary basic health treatment. The pomegranate Punica granatum is a bush 3 to 5 meters in height, with opposite and obtuse leaves, flowers with wrinkled white, yellow, or orange petals. The fruit is composed of a yellow to red peel that covers the seeds, the fleshy arils of which are eaten. Punica granatum is a plant with worldwide application in folk medicine. There are references to an antimicrobial effect of pomegranate products against many pathogenic bacterial species, including inhibition of formation of biofilms [8]-[11], antiplasmodial activity, and effects against Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia lamblia[12]. Polyphenols extracted from pomegranate fruit rind were active against phytopathogenic fungi [13]. The extract of P. granatum showed good results as a topical antifungal agent for the treatment of candidosis associated with denture stomatitis [14]. The tannin punicalagin is the major component of pomegranate fruit peel. This substance was isolated not only from Punica granatum, but also was described from Terminallia mollis and Terminallia brachystemma, as having antifungal activity against Candida albicans, C. krusei, and C. parapsilosis[15].

The present study evaluate the antidermatophyte activity of pomegranate fruit peel extract and investigate its effect on different fungal development stages, cytotoxicity and possible mechanisms of action. The active substance of pomegranate peel was isolated and identified as well.