A man shot two people inside the Twilight Exit at 25th and Cherry Sunday night before exiting the bar and firing at police officers outside. Police returned fire and killed him.

The two people shot inside, a 25-year-old female and a bouncer in his 30s, were taken to the hospital with non-life-threatening injuries. No officers were struck during the exchange outside the bar.

Update: The shooter has been identified as James D Anderson. See update below for more details from the Seattle Times.

The incident started around 10:15 p.m., according to police. There were at least 20 people in the bar when the suspect entered, apparently looking for the woman, who was an ex.

After exchanging words, the man pulled out a gun and shot her. He also shot a Twilight Exit bouncer when he tried to intervene.

When the suspect exited the bar, police contacted him and told him to drop his gun. He lifted the gun and fired one shot at officers, police said. Officers then returned fire, striking him.

Medics declared the suspect dead on arrival. The two victims inside were transported to the hospital.

Witnesses gathered outside, and emergency responders gave them ponchos to keep dry from the light, cold drizzle as they waiting for detectives. A Metro bus arrived, and witnesses boarded to stay warm and talk to officers. They then left the scene in the bus, headed to station for further statements.

The shooting occurred just two blocks from where Justin Ferrari’s van came to a stop after he was shot and killed in May 2012, one block from where Tyrone Love was shot and killed in 2009, one block from where Quincy Coleman has shot and killed on Halloween 2008, and two blocks from where a man was shot and seriously injured in August.

The Twilight Exit has been a huge supporter of CDNews, and a personal favorite watering hole. We send our best wishes to the victims, staff and everyone in the bar.

Update — Monday 9:40 AM: Twilight Exit management has posted the following message to the bar’s Facebook page:

The page has also become a de facto message board for customers to share support for the victims and the Twilight.

CDNews spoke with Twilight Exit owner Stephan Mollmann, who has had a long night. He said the shooter and victim were regulars in the Twilight, and their disputes have raised concerns in the past.

“Right when it happened, I knew who it was,” he said.

He said the bouncer remains in the ICU in stable condition with a gunshot wound to his thigh.

Police have not yet cleared the scene. Once they do, the many bags, coats and other belongings left will be taken to the Neighbor Lady at 23rd and Union, which Mollmann also owns in partnership with Shira Bray.

Update: The Seattle Times spoke to a witness who described the following:

“He was getting kicked out as I was coming in and we were getting our IDs checked,” said Alex Koch, a 28-year-old Seattle Central Community College student. When the man returned, he started yelling at a woman and shot her, according to the witnesses. “I heard that first shot; everyone is getting under tables,” Koch said. “I used a small table to barricade myself as he was shoving through the door.” Koch and others began streaming out a door onto East Cherry, while other patrons fled.

Update: The Stranger’s Marti Jonjak was at the Twilight Exit when the shooting occurred. She was next to the victim when the shooter entered and started yelling at her. The man left and returned with a gun:

Things calmed down right after the man left, and we shrugged it off. Something like 20-30 minutes later, we heard a popping sound, like a fire cracker. We couldn’t see exactly what was happening, but I suddenly felt panicked, and Lexi and I crouched down on the floor, we were trapped in the back corner of the bar. The young man walked towards us, he was holding a gun. I saw the beautiful girl was next to me, on my left. Our shoulders were touching. I saw her long black curly hair. As we crouched on the floor, the man was standing over all of us with his gun. He was hyper focused on the girl, and then I jumped up and ran past him. Before I got outside, I saw a pool of blood on the floor of the entry way. I tucked myself behind a dumpster and saw the bouncer laying near by. He was covered in blood, and another man was kneeling over him. This man handed me his cell phone, it was already dialing 911. The cell phone was smeared in blood, it left blood stains on my hands. Lexi and came out after that, and just after, the cops showed up in the alley, one pointed his flashlight at me and I held my hands up, and they gathered us together for questions. Lexi was barefoot because the woman who’d been shot had fallen on top of her, and as she struggled to leave her shoes somehow came loose and fell off beneath the woman’s body. More police and medics arrived, and later, I watched the bouncer and the girl being transported on stretchers into the ambulance. Read more…

Update: The shooter has been identified as James D Anderson, 33. From the Seattle Times:

The dead man was not formally identified Monday, but a relative said his name was James D. Anderson, 33, of Seattle.

Anderson had been arrested near the same nightclub, the Twilight Exit, two months ago after he allegedly left the couple’s 7-month-old son unattended in a car that was parked nearby, according to court documents. Anderson was charged with reckless endangerment and leaving the child unrestrained and alone in a car while he walked up to the Twilight Exit on East Cherry Street, according to Seattle Municipal Court documents.

Original breaking news coverage:

There was a large emergency response to an incident near 25th and Cherry shortly after 10:15 p.m. Sunday.

Real Time 911 lists the incident as a “multiple casualty incident.”

We will update as we learn more.

Update: The shooting occurred at the Twilight Exit. No official SPD statement yet, but scanner reports say three people were shot, two inside and one in the alley.

From SPD:

@SeattlePD: Preliminary info on shooting at 25/Cherry: Gunman opened fire in bar, 2 people hit. Suspect is down, but no details yet. More to come.

From SFD:

@SeattleFire: Medic transported 2 gunshot victims from 2500 block of east cherry . Male in 30’s with critical injuries. Female in 20’s stable. 3rd DOA

Witnesses say police shot the suspect.

Update from SPD:

@SeattlePD: Update: Susp. shot a man & a woman inside the bar before he was contacted by officers. Appears victims have non-life-threatening injuries

The female victim is 25. The male is in his 30s, police say.

We are awaiting an SPD briefing.

Update: SPD’s Nick Metz says it started as domestic incident between suspect and a woman. He then shot her and a bouncer, both not life-threatening.

As the suspect was exiting into the alley, SPD officer confronted him. Suspect shot once at officers, and officer returned fire, killing the suspect.