Media playback is not supported on this device Great chance for Spurs to win trophies - Harry Redknapp

FA Cup semi-final

Venue: Wembley Date: Sunday 15 April Kick-off: 1800 BST Coverage: Live text commentary on BBC Sport website, live commentary on BBC Radio 5 live

Tottenham manager Harry Redknapp is determined to end his club's 21-year wait for FA Cup glory this season.

Spurs, who won the last of their eight FA Cups in 1991, face Chelsea in the semi-final on Sunday and Redknapp said: "It's about time we won another trophy.

"This is a great opportunity for us to go all the way this year. On our day we can beat Chelsea. We can beat anyone.

"There is not a lot between the two teams, but they have the medals to show for it."

They [Tottenham] are a hard team to beat. Harry Redknapp is a fantastic manager and he has turned them into a real force this season so it will be a tough game. Gary Cahill Chelsea defender

Spurs are fourth in the Premier League, two points ahead of Chelsea, but have won only one of their last eight games.

"We were in a fantastic position but have ended up losing points," said Redknapp.

"Arsenal have been on a great run and picked up win after win and that's what has changed - but I'd have taken this position at the start of the year for sure.

"People forget where Tottenham should be at times.

"They have won two Carling Cups since 1991 and the average finishing position until four or five years ago was probably about 10th."

Redknapp guided the team to Champions League football in the 2010-11 season and is confident of doing so again, but insists new recruits are needed.

"If we want Champions League football again we need to improve the squad again in the summer," the 65-year-old said. "You have to keep improving because everyone else around us will.

"If you want to start winning championships then you really have to push on and raise the bar because that's the only way you are going to do it.

"You just need to keep adding a little bit of quality to your squad. We need to bring one or two top quality players in and make us even better."

Despite their indifferent recent form, Spurs winger Gareth Bale is confident his team have sufficient quality to overcome Roberto Di Matteo's side at Wembley.

FA Cup semi-finals Liverpool v Everton 14 April Tottenham v Chelsea 15 April Both games at Wembley

"Chelsea are a great side and have done really well in the Champions League. It won't be easy but if we are on our game on the day, then we can reach the final because I feel we have the better team," the 22-year-old said.

"We let ourselves down against Portsmouth two years ago [in the semi-final], we didn't play well and that was a tough defeat to take.

"We've got another chance to reach the FA Cup final and we're determined not to let it slip by this time."

Chelsea have won the FA Cup five times since Spurs last lifted the trophy, their most recent success coming in 2010.

Their defence of the trophy last season was ended in the fourth round with a defeat on penalties by Everton, but defender Gary Cahill, who joined the Blues from Bolton in January, was part of the Wanderers side that was beaten 5-0 by Stoke City in the last four.

"That game is not a fond memory," said the 26-year-old. "It's something that hurt at the time and still hurts me now. It was just a freak result. It was a freak game.

"But now I have a chance to put that right on Sunday."