Shrinkzxo Profile Joined August 2014 Dotoland 268 Posts Last Edited: 2016-10-18 22:20:34 #1 Xiao8 Interview

"I have a good mentality"

Xiao8 is undoubtedly a DotA legend. In a career spanning all the way back to DotA 1, 'The Director' has earned numerous accolades over the years; the most important trophy in his cabinet undoubtedly being the TI4 aegis, which he earned during his tenure on Newbee. However, sometimes Xiao8 can appear less than clean-cut between his broken marriage and the numerous flirtations with female streamers on air. This includes one particular incident which caused him eternal embarrassment as well as earning himself the nickname “Bottom8.*” If all that wasn’t bad enough, he spent most of his career associating himself with the most controversial team in China — the Ruru Clan, more commonly referred to as LGD. This year, Xiao8 decided to ‘retire’ once more, only coming back to participate with an LGD team that, in part due to Sept’s visa denial, disappointed fans and pundits alike. Before revealing his new roster, the Director himself met Nibo from e-Sports Magazine to discuss all he wanted to know. You can find a full translation of the interview after the break!



*Translator’s Note: Xiao8 was caught on-stream, thinking that he was off, telling another (female) streamer ‘Eat my bottom’, hence the name.





Taking a break seems to have become trendy in this transfer window. Aside from Cty, Hao and MMY, European players like FATA and Xboct announced breaks of their own. Xiao8, who has already ‘retired’ and came back twice, has naturally been subject to doubt. However, as far as he is concerned, if one can adjust one’s form by taking a break, it will be much better than playing RPGs and lazing away. As a pro player, the most important thing to know is how to adjust yourself.





‘I have a good mentality; everything becomes understandable (to me) over time.’



On the 30th of August, Xiao8 started his stream as usual. What he did not expect is that chat room would be unusually active — a screen full of ‘Bottom8 changed the world’ made him feel helpless but at the same time, speechless. ‘Has everybody had enough? Get up, take a break, and get a glass of water, people.’ Xiao8 responded to these chats with his own chitchatting: “I’m a man of good mentality, I felt a lot of pressure when many people started to criticise me. Afterwards things became understandable to me slowly,” says Xiao8.



Xiao8 is undoubtedly a DotA legend. In a career spanning all the way back to DotA 1, 'The Director' has earned numerous accolades over the years; the most important trophy in his cabinet undoubtedly being the TI4 aegis, which he earned during his tenure on Newbee. However, sometimes Xiao8 can appear less than clean-cut between his broken marriage and the numerous flirtations with female streamers on air. This includes one particular incident which caused him eternal embarrassment as well as earning himself the nickname “Bottom8.*” If all that wasn’t bad enough, he spent most of his career associating himself with the most controversial team in China — the Ruru Clan, more commonly referred to as LGD. This year, Xiao8 decided to ‘retire’ once more, only coming back to participate with an LGD team that, in part due to Sept’s visa denial, disappointed fans and pundits alike. Before revealing his new roster, the Director himself met Nibo from e-Sports Magazine to discuss all he wanted to know. You can find a full translation of the interview after the break!Taking a break seems to have become trendy in this transfer window. Aside from Cty, Hao and MMY, European players like FATA and Xboct announced breaks of their own. Xiao8, who has already ‘retired’ and came back twice, has naturally been subject to doubt. However, as far as he is concerned, if one can adjust one’s form by taking a break, it will be much better than playing RPGs and lazing away. As a pro player, the most important thing to know is how to adjust yourself.On the 30th of August, Xiao8 started his stream as usual. What he did not expect is that chat room would be unusually active — a screen full of ‘Bottom8 changed the world’ made him feel helpless but at the same time, speechless. ‘Has everybody had enough? Get up, take a break, and get a glass of water, people.’ Xiao8 responded to these chats with his own chitchatting: “I’m a man of good mentality, I felt a lot of pressure when many people started to criticise me. Afterwards things became understandable to me slowly,” says Xiao8. Q: Are you under a lot of pressure recently?

A: There were many people who were quite harsh to me in the beginning, which made me feel some pressure. However, my mentality is good, and things became understandable to me.



Q: A lot of people say you were the one who changed the scene with your “retirements.”

A: I don’t know about that. I had to prepare for the wedding and many other things after TI4. I wasn’t able to balance life and work at the same time, so I decided to take a break from Dota. Newbee actually made an offer for me to stay on the main roster and let a substitute play while I am resting, but I felt it is not good to be too idle, so I declined their offer.



Q: Then what about your break after TI5?

A: It was because of the divorce. I felt completely out of shape during that time, hence the need to take a break.



Q: Now, what do you think about the practice of ‘retiring’ only to come back later?

A: I think if one can adjust one’s physical and psychological shape and then can come back to play with an even more serious attitude, it is much better than playing online games and lazing away.



Q: A lot of players think that this sort of practice is unprofessional.

A: Anyone would be very passive and unserious if they had just finished playing a TI. So, no matter what you do - take a rest or play badly - people are displeased. I feel as pro players, the most important thing is to know how to adjust yourself and play with better shape and form.



‘This half-year at LGD was relatively smooth.’



In the past half year, LGD was consistently inconsitent. They received a direct invitation to TI, yet lost baffling matches that they should have won. Looking back, Xiao8 thinks that such results were totally understandable for a team who had only been together for half a year.



In the past half year, LGD was consistently inconsitent. They received a direct invitation to TI, yet lost baffling matches that they should have won. Looking back, Xiao8 thinks that such results were totally understandable for a team who had only been together for half a year. Q: How do you summarise this half-year?

A: There are a lot of opinions about the club, which means there are also a lot of haters. This creates a lot of pressure. But in hindsight, apart from Sept’s visa, everything else went smoothly. It felt very good to be a pro again.



Q: The team’s performance was extreme. You would go from playing well to losing matches that you should have won. Are you happy with that?

A: The results are very good for a team that had only been together for half a year. But in terms of satisfaction, it certainly did not reach my expectation.



Q: What was your expectation?

A: It was initially getting into TI. We managed to secure an invite by being in several tournaments preceding it, but in the end Septemper’s Visa was denied and Banana was only able to train with us for a week. The idea at the time was to avoid going out in the first round. So this half-year was relatively smooth by that metric.



Q: No matter if it was TI or tournaments before that, LGD always gave us the impression that you are not at your best. What’s the reason?

A: We didn’t play enough games and the chemistry didn’t take off quickly enough. Additionally, the team had a newbie — their performances between online and offline games can differ greatly.



‘Leaving was my choice’



As the decorated captain of LGD, Xiao8 nevertheless chose to leave the team. The reason why he left is not however, as popularly assumed, due to issues with Maybe. He simply wanted a change.



As the decorated captain of LGD, Xiao8 nevertheless chose to leave the team. The reason why he left is not however, as popularly assumed, due to issues with Maybe. He simply wanted a change. Q: You have spent most of your pro career at LGD, why did you choose to form a new team?

A: People say I have issues with Maybe. There aren’t any. That being said, losing games at TI does make people desperate so it is normal to argue. However, leaving LGD is my own choice. I mainly wanted to change and move into a new environment.



Q: Why?

A: The chemistry between the players was developing too slowly.



Q: Was the formation of the team your idea?

A: I negotiated it with Yao.



Q: What is your expectation for this new team?

A: One step at a time. I hope new environment and new team members can have better chemistry.



In and outside of the game, Xiao8 remains a man of controversy in the eyes of the public. Winning TI4 for Newbee as their captain makes him accomplished and famous. Meanwhile, twice retiring and coming back on top of a broken marriage all bring him into the vortex of public opinions. Then, LGD’s loss at TI6, another retirement and yet another comeback, made Xiao8 an enemy of the people. Some say he’s veg* while others say he truly changed the scene. Facing pressure from all sides, Xiao8 did not choose to escape. Buddying up with his good buddy Yao has given him another chance — a chance to rectify his name with achievements in the pro scene.



*Translators note: "Veg" is another word for weak. Literally, it means that he doesn’t have much meat to offer.





Source: http://dota2.sgamer.com/news/201609/165590.html

Translation: Shrinkzxo

Editor: BluemoonSC In and outside of the game, Xiao8 remains a man of controversy in the eyes of the public. Winning TI4 for Newbee as their captain makes him accomplished and famous. Meanwhile, twice retiring and coming back on top of a broken marriage all bring him into the vortex of public opinions. Then, LGD’s loss at TI6, another retirement and yet another comeback, made Xiao8 an enemy of the people. Some say he’s veg* while others say he truly changed the scene. Facing pressure from all sides, Xiao8 did not choose to escape. Buddying up with his good buddy Yao has given him another chance — a chance to rectify his name with achievements in the pro scene. Translator https://twitter.com/shrinkzxo