Let’s start with the basics… What’s this app all about!?

Sweatcoin is a digital currency (cryptocurrency) that you earn by walking or running. You earn Sweatcoin through an app on your phone; it tracks your outdoor steps throughout the day and rewards you with about 1 SWC (1 Sweatcoin) per 1,000 steps you make. These coins can been redeemed for gifts ranging from magazines, healthy energy drinks, music downloads, to digital watches, running shoes, electronics, and more.

Heck, the app creators even said they want you to be able to pay your taxes with Sweatcoins… crazy, right!?

But what about earning money? Keep reading!

Yes, you really can earn free gifts… even gift cards!

Since I downloaded the app back in 2016, they’ve added hundreds of new offers to the marketplace. I’ve cashed out on Amazon cards, PayPal, subscriptions, sunglasses, shoes, food boxes, and more. Now, these things required a lot of Sweatcoins – at the time I was running 6 miles a day, so the Sweatcoins were stacking up fast.

(Did you know, we have a FAQ page with TONS of info about this app! Click here to check it out.)

Sweatcoin? Blockchain? Is this like Bitcoin?

Sweatcoin is also going to be a blockchain cryptocurrency (still in development as of September 2018).

It will be the first every cryptocurrency you can earn by walking or running!

What that means is that you can buy and sell Sweatcoins on an exchange.

But before we go deeper, let’s watch an Intro To Sweatcoin video!

What is Sweatcoin?

Sweatcoin (SWC) is an alternative form of currency gained by ‘mining’ Sweatcoin through physical activity. You may have heard of Bitcoin (BTC). You earn BTC by using your graphics card to solve complex equations in hopes of finding the next block of coins, known as mining. Sweatcoin is similar, but different, in that you use your real life steps to generate SWC. It’s not random whether or not you find coins – it is guaranteed. Many of the BTC miners may spend months of processing and gain nothing due to the limited supply of Bitcoin. Sweatcoin users who are runners can go out there and earn 1 SWC in as little as 8 minutes, or even less!

Click here to browse other Frequently Asked Questions

But let’s back up and start with the basics.

Sweatcoin is an app that you install on your iPhone (Coming soon to Android!) It runs in the background and tracks your physical activity – running or walking – and rewards you exactly 0.95 SWC for every 1,000 steps you take.

You can either spend the coin right away on low-cost offers that interest you, such as music downloads or magazine subscriptions, or you can save up the SWC to afford big-ticket items such as digital watches, video game consoles, running shoes, and more. At one point, SWC users were able to redeem a PS4+games for the cost of several hundred coins!

The offers are very short-lived, and they circulate often. This keeps the experience always fresh. For example, if the app featured the same 5 offers for many months at a time, users would grow very weary. Therefore, you have to be on your toes, checking in every day for new offers and strategically spending your hard-earned SWC on the ones with the most value. (Read: Determining Offer Value)

Is the app really free?

Yes! Everything within the app costs Sweatcoin. You never have to provide a credit card or address or any personal information. All that’s needed is a username and email address for verification.

How many coins can I earn?

With the free Mover membership level, you can earn up to 5 of the Sweatcoin cryptocurrency per day, minus a 5% conversion commission. However, what’s amazing about SWC is that it’s literally free to up how many steps you can track in a day. It only costs you … Sweatcoin! The very first day of using the app, I went out and ran 6 miles to earn 5SWC. I used these fresh coins to purchase the Shaker membership level, which allows me to earn up to 10SWC per day. After upgrading, I went out and ran another 6 miles to reach my daily limit.

Read our Frequently Asked Questions!

Does the app use up a lot of battery?

The Sweatcoin app has a battery saver mode that limits battery consumption at the expense of some GPS accuracy. Some users note that this saves about 20% of its battery usage. However, I personally run the app without this battery saving mode and have not noticed a significant difference. If you compared this app to the very famous Pokemon GO app, it uses a mere fraction of the battery as that app uses.

More questions? Read the handy FAQ!