Public schoolchildren across the country were physically restrained or isolated in rooms they couldn’t leave at least 267,000 times in the 2011-2012 school year, despite a near-consensus that such practices are dangerous and have no therapeutic benefit. Many states have little regulation or oversight of such practices. This map shows where your state stands. Data compiled as of January 2014. Related: Violent and Legal: The Shocking Ways School Kids are Being Pinned Down, Isolated Against Their Will

Compare states by Total Score Is the use of restraints limited to emergencies? Is the use of seclusions limited to emergencies? Is parental notification of either practice required? Is the use of seclusions prohibited? Are restraints that restrict breathing banned? Mechanical restraints prohibited ProPublica awarded each state a score based on how closely they follow six key elements that are outlined in reform bills and U.S. Department of Education non-mandatory guidance. The highest score is 12, for most restrictions, and the lowest score is 0, meaning least restrictions. A patchwork of regulation ProPublica awarded each state a score based on how closely they follow six key elements that are outlined in reform bills and U.S. Department of Education non-mandatory guidance. The lowest score is 0, with the least restrictions.

Is the use of restraints limited to emergencies? Emergencies involve potential harm to the student or others. ProPublica did not consider “academic disruption” or “property damage” emergencies.

Is the use of seclusions limited to emergencies? Emergencies involve potential harm to the student or others. ProPublica did not consider “academic disruption” or “property damage” emergencies. Georgia is the only state to prohibit seclusion in all cases.

Is parental notification of either practice required? Most states don’t require that parents be told every time children are subject to restraints or seclusions.

Is the use of seclusions prohibited? Georgia is the only state to prohibit seclusion in all cases.

Are restraints that restrict breathing banned? This includes the so-called "prone" restraint, which some states have prohibited explicitly.

Are mechanical restraints prohibited? “Mechanical” restraints use something artificial like straps, handcuffs or bungee cords to do the restraining.

State Total Score Restraints limited to emergencies Seclusion limited to emergencies Parental notification required Prohibits seclusion Prohibits restraints that restrict breathing Prohibits mechanical restraints

* parental notication in some instances

** with parental waiver

*** if included in IEP

**** ban limited to prone restraint

(a) Prone restraint permitted by trained staff.

(b) Prone restraint allowed through August 2015.

(c) Seclusion allowed if child is "supervised."

(d) Minnesota's statue "was drafted in a way to create some ambiguity," using "physical holding" instead of "restraint."

Source: Jessica Butler, a national advocate for children with autism. Meral Agish provided research for this map.