Subject Enrollment

Between October 2013 and March 2015, 379 subjects were enrolled from emergency departments (EDs) and inpatient and outpatient centers into a three‐site, internal review board‐approved prospective clinical trial. One hundred twenty‐six subjects were enrolled at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC), a 600‐bed urban level 1 academic medical center. One hundred twenty‐eight subjects were enrolled at the University of Cincinnati Medical Center (UC), a 498‐bed urban academic medical center. One hundred twenty‐five subjects were enrolled at Princeton Community Hospital (PCH), a 267‐bed Appalachian community hospital in southern West Virginia. The inclusion and exclusion criteria classified subjects into one of three groups: suicidal, mentally ill, or control.

Multi‐gated inclusion criteria were used. For the first gate, all patients were reviewed using the electronic status board for a complaint of suicide, suicidal ideation, or psychiatric evaluation. For patients with mental illness and for control subjects, any complaint was accepted except those related to suicide. For those who passed the first gate, a second review of their electronic medical record (EMR) was conducted before they were approached for enrollment. Suicidal subjects were approached if they had come to the EDs or psychiatric units because of suicidal ideation or attempts within the previous 24 hours. Patients with mental illness were enrolled from the ED and outpatient mental health clinics if they had a definitive mental illness diagnosis but had not had prior suicidal attempts, active thoughts of suicide, or plans to die by suicide within the previous year as reported by the patient and EMR. Control subjects were patients who came to the ED with no history of mental health diagnoses or suicidal ideation, as reported by the patient and EMR (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Receiver operator curve (ROC): suicide versus control (upper), suicide versus mentally ill (middle), and suicide versus mentally ill with control. The ROC curves for adolescents (blue), adults (red), and all subjects (black) generated where the nonsuicidal population is controls (top), mentally ill (middle), and mentally ill and controls, using linguistic and acoustic features. The gray line is the AROC curve for a baseline (random) classifier.

Potential subjects were excluded if their native language was not English, if they had any serious medical injury or mental retardation that could prohibit consent, if they would be unavailable for a follow‐up interview, or if they could not comply with study procedures.

Participation incentives were site‐specific. CCHMC and UC subjects were paid $50 for the initial interview and $25 for the follow‐up. PCH subjects were paid $25 for the initial interview and $25 for the follow‐up interview.