Weeks later their adventure would be blighted by bitter disappointment as they arrived at the South Pole to find that the rival team led by Roald Amundsen had reached the South Pole first.

But on Christmas Eve 1911, with hopes presumably still high, Scott's team had treated themselves to a special meal of horsemeat flavoured with onion and curry powder.

"Then an arrowroot, cocoa and biscuit hoosh [thick stew] sweetened; then a plum pudding; then cocoa with raisins, and finally a dessert of caramels and ginger," he wrote in his diary.

"After the feast it was difficult to move. Wilson and I couldn't finish our share of plum pudding. We have all slept splendidly and feel thoroughly warm - such is the effect of full feeding."

Four days later - on Dec 28 - the explorers were continuing to battle on through the snow.

"The marches are terribly monotonous," wrote Scott. "One's thoughts wander occasionally to pleasanter scenes and places, but the necessity to keep the course, or some hitch in the surface, quickly brings them back."

A new exhibition commemorating the ill-fated adventure will open at the Natural History Museum on Jan 20, three days after the 100th anniversary of the explorers reaching the pole.

Artefacts such as clothes, sledges and pickaxes will be reunited with scientific specimens collected by the explorers on the Terra Nova expedition, as well as a re-creation of the wooden hut at base camp.

Elin Simonsson of the Natural History Museum said the exhibition aimed to show the importance of the voyage as a scientific endeavour - a story that has been overshadowed by the human tragedy of the explorers.

Their study of weather, zoology and the relatively new discipline of glaciology "really made a great contribution to what was known about Antractica", she told the Guardian.

The explorers' bodies were found alongside their letters and diaries in November 1912, with Scott's famous final entry on March 29 revealing his despair as they were stranded by the weather and ending: "For god's sake look after our people."