It’s 91.8 The Fan’s birthday! What better way to celebrate than with a Pokemon tournament with prizes?! Please make sure to go over the rules one more time so there’s no confusion. They are located after the jump as well as the registration forums.

Pokemon Tournament Rules

Welcome to the second ever Pokemon tournament hosted by 91.8 The Fan. I am your favorite Holiday-themed host and resident Pokemon expert, Christmas. As tournament director I will be taking care of everything involving the tournament, so if you have any comments, questions or concerns, please feel free to send me a PM on the Forums. Following this introduction is a list of rules that must be followed at all times by all entrants. Please read everything, and enjoy!

Basic Rules

Pokemon

There are twenty-one unusable Pokemon as outlined by the Battle Tower/Subway/Maison rules, as well as two additional Pokemon

Each party will be made up of six individual Pokemon. No duplicates allowed!

All Pokemon are to be auto-leveled to 50

Moves and abilities

Absolutely no one-hit KO moves allowed (Fissure, Horn Drill, Guillotine, Sheer Cold)

Moves that alter evasion/accuracy are banned. These include but are not limited to: Sand-Attack, Smokescreen, Mud Slap, Minimize and Double Team. In addition, Pokemon with the Moody ability are not allowed. Please make sure that if you use Remoraid, Octillery, Smearagle, Snorunt, Glalie, Bidoof or Bibarel that they do not have the Moody ability

Items

All hold items are allowed, except for BrightPowder

Each Pokemon may hold an individual item. No two Pokemon may hold the same item. You can hold multiple Mega Stones on the same team to confuse your opponent

Tournament System

Tournament is open to all of the sixth generation games

Tournament will be done in a double elimination bracket

All first round match-ups will be decided completely at random

All battles are single battles

Tournament will begin on January 19th and end on January 26th (or whenever the final match has concluded). This is to ensure ample time for all matches depending on the number of entrants

Registration

Registration will be open today! Please do so in the forum linked at the bottom of this post.

Registration is open to any members of the 91.8 community who have signed up on the forums. This includes all staff members!

Battle Conclusion

At the end of each battle, the winner is to send a Personal Message to the Tournament Director stating that the outcome of the match. This Personal Message will be forwarded to the loser who must reply saying they accept, thus making the match officially concluded. If you feel there may be a dispute, feel free to take a picture of the result screen for confirmation. Anyone caught lying about match results will be immediately disqualified and banned from any future events like this.

Each round will have a set date and time in which it MUST be completed. If the match is not completed on time, the offending member will be subject to disqualification.

Banned Pokemon

The following list of Pokemon may not be used in the tournament. We know that not everyone has access to these Pokemon due to the delay of Pokemon Bank, but we just want to be super sure.

Mewtwo

Mew

Lugia

Ho-oh

Celebi

Kyogre

Groudon

Rayquaza

Jirachi

Deoxys

Dialga

Palkia

Giratina

Phione

Manaphy

Darkrai

Shaymin

Arceus

Xerneas

Yveltal

Zygarde

Wynaut

Wobuffet

Please note: Any member who breaks the tournament rules, or rules of the forums will be subject to removal of the tournament without warning. These rules will be enforced with a zero-tolerance, no excuse policy.

And there you have it, Fanatics! A full list of rules you are encouraged to review and know upon registering for the tournament. But while you’re doing that, why not check out these suggestions I’ve put together for you before you embark on your quest for victory.

Know your Pokemon! Use a team with variety so you can compete with the many different types throughout the Tournament Test your wi-fi connection beforehand! This is an important one, because if you cannot connect to your opponent, you will have to be removed from the Tournament! If you feel a member has broken any of the rules, please send me a Personal Message including all the details you have regarding the issue and it will be dealt with accordingly. Have fun! Don’t be a sore loser. Even if you lose, congratulate your opponent on the win! It’s a friendly tournament that we are all meant to enjoy!

Well Fanatics, that’s all I’ve got for you! Now that you’ve reached this point, you are all ready to pit your Pokemon against other Pokemon in a battle for the ages! I wish you luck in your quest to become champion!

Good luck and have fun!

Christmas

FAQ

Is there a prize?

I’m glad you asked! There will be prizes for the top three places!

1st place will get a custom bead sprite, made by Elk, on a size scale up to $30, as well as a $20 gift card for SharkRobot, Amazon or RightStuf. For sizing reference for beadsprites, please visit out store. 2nd place will also get a bead sprite, limited to a Pokemon of your choice out of the 718 that exist, on a size scale of up to $10. Again, for sizing reference, please visit out store. 3rd place will get a 91.8 The Fan brand shirt of their choice. You can see our variety of shirts in the store.

What does Double Elimination mean?

Double Elimination means that if you lose your match-up in the first bracket, you have another chance in the loser’s bracket! The winner of the loser’s bracket will have a chance to face the top two people in the winner’s bracket to be the very best.

Who came up with these rules?

I totally just copied the rules from the last tournament and tweaked them a little bit for the new format.

Can my friend join?

If you have a friend who would enjoy all of the beneficial, fun and exciting features we offer here at 91.8 The Fan, tell them to come join up! Have them introduce themselves and have them contribute positively to the community, and they are free to join us!