I am parcel31u the relatable gamer, and I make third-party modpacks for both the FTB and Curse Launcher. I have started the series "Material Energy" and below is a list of all my packs, what they are about, and of course where you can download them, also a place to find all my changelogs for every one of my packs.

(1.6.4) Material Energy^3

Spoiler







Found only as a listed pack on the FTB luancher in the third-party tab.



FTB Forum Page My first modpack for 1.6.4, made back in July 2014 for Jampacked 1. A CTM HQM map, that uses spatial IO to hold dungeons holding many mobs and traps.Found only as a listed pack on the FTB luancher in the third-party tab. Material Energy^4



Spoiler









Changlog:



1.6.0



No more 1,000 missing items

Fixed trophies from not detecting

Placed all trophies in world

Removed not working quests

Removed Ancient trees as it was crashing for no reason

Added anvils in the start, with soulbound books now easily accessible

Added a recipe for charcoal charcoal and graphite







Found both on Curse and FTB as a listed pack in the third-party tab, however the version on Curse is more current.

FTB Fourm Page My second modpack, the sequel to ME^3, which embodies the first as a HQM/CTM map where players are in a space station with another spatial IO to progress through different dungeons fighting increasing difficult mobs.Changlog:1.6.0Found both on Curse and FTB as a listed pack in the third-party tab, however the version on Curse is more current.

Material Energy^-1



Spoiler











Changelog

0.1.2

Fixes NEI searching 0.1.1

Fixed Minechem recipe lookup

Found only on Curse.



FTB Forum Page An HQM map based on skyblocks, with a vast blank canvas filled with nothing, having to use minechem to generate all your resources as you follow along the 200+ quests.

Material Energy Exploration

Spoiler My first non-HQM map, which upset most people. Material Energy Exploration is adventure map where the player must explore and solve puzzles in a anti-chamber fashion where some puzzles are not straight forward, unavailing the mystery behind the map as you progress, following along with the lore from Lore Expansion.















Found only on Curse. Found only on Curse.