Very daunting. Probably less so for China and Russia. But carriers aren't for them, directly. The strike group has some powerful tools in its arsenal (the Aegis system being one of them). For minor powers, it's effectively impossible. For great powers, it wouldn't matter anyway.

I want to point something out, the US doesn't maintain aircraft carriers to wage war against Russia or China. That's incredibly silly. The US maintains nuclear weapons to prevent such a conflict. Massive industrialized powers with nuclear weapons don't go to war --at least they haven't-- and they are unlikely to do so. It is standard military doctrine that the kinds of war between these nations is prevented for a collection of reasons, none of which has anything to do with aircraft carriers.

So all the posturing about how Russia would sink the carriers or how China could launch missiles at them is pointless. Any such action would be in retaliation against the US for an aggressive act (and deserved) or would be the initial salvo of an attack, which would then precipitate an American response (and deserved). Whatever started it and whoever was at fault would be completely meaningless. These nations aren't going to war and if they did, the carriers in their respective navies would be utterly pointless.

The purpose of the carriers is to extend the dominance of the nation into places where it would have an impact. That means patrolling shipping lanes, settling disputes and bringing firepower to places that are unlikely to wage war against the US. Carriers are only useful in asymmetric warfare. Nobody will tell you that because using Russia and China as the bugbear to build a stronger, better navy is, of course, far more important than pointing out how important they are in settling disputes between Naboo and the Trade Fed ... wait. Wrong story. But see how lame and boring that is?

Right.

Carriers are exist to project the ideological and military might of the owning-nation. The US, France and UK are the only blue-water navies operating them with any effectiveness. There are nations like Brazil, Russia, India and China that are dipping their toes into the blue waters. It looks like China and India will get there by the mid 20's. But right now, it's about domination, and largely domination of energy shipments.

And yes, that's a very good reason to dominate. Cut off the supply of fossil fuels and swathes of people die in six months. There is no alternative right now (though, I suspect they are reaching critical mass and we'll see that by the end of the 20's too). I believe Steven Sears, in "The British Empire" who said, "He who dominates the seas, controls the shipping lanes. He who dominates the shipping lanes, controls the world by result."

The Spanish Empire showed that controlling a thing politically was too tedious. The British Empire (really a company with a monarch and a navy) showed that to dominate the world, you own the oceans and let the small players fall into line. Every major power who failed the ocean test, always failed in the end. The US takes the British lesson seriously.