NEW YORK -- Justin Verlander breezed to the AL Cy Young Award on Tuesday in a unanimous vote after the Detroit Tigers' ace won the pitching version of the Triple Crown.

Verlander dominated the balloting in much the same way he humbled hitters with his 100 mph fastball, sharp curve and wicked slider.

Now, the big question of the baseball awards season: Will he also be chosen the AL MVP next Monday?

"Do I think it's possible? Yes. Would I like to win it? Of course," Verlander said during a conference call from his home in Virginia. "It's kind of a weird scenario."

"Pitchers are on the ballot," he said. Bolstering the case of all pitchers, Verlander pointed to "the tremendous effect we have on the day of our game."

No starting pitcher has won the honor since Roger Clemens in 1986, with Dennis Eckersley the last reliever to get it in 1992. Many observers say pitchers shouldn't win the MVP, period, contending they already have their own award. Verlander's year, though, has ratcheted up the debate in a crowded MVP field that includes Curtis Granderson, Jacoby Ellsbury, Jose Bautista, Miguel Cabrera and more.

"If you had told me at the beginning of the year that I had the chance to win the MVP and be a unanimous Cy Young winner, it would have blown my mind," he said in an ESPN "SportsCenter" interview Tuesday.

If he doesn't win, Verlander said he'd like to see Granderson, his former teammate, get the award.

Verlander led the majors in wins by going 24-5 and topped baseball with 250 strikeouts. His 2.40 ERA was the best among AL pitchers who qualified for the title.

Verlander drew all 28 first-place votes in balloting by members of the Baseball Writers' Association of America and finished with 196 points.

Jered Weaver (18-8, 2.41) of the Los Angeles Angels was the only other pitcher listed on every ballot and second with 97 points. James Shields of Tampa Bay was third with 66, followed by CC Sabathia of the New York Yankees with 63. Tigers reliever Jose Valverde, who was perfect in 49 save chances, was fifth with 28.