GATINEAU, QC--(Marketwired - June 13, 2017) - The Hydropothecary Corporation ("THCX" or the "Company") (TSX VENTURE: THCX) (formerly BFK Capital Corp.) announces that it has changed its auditors from UHY McGovern, Hurley, Cunningham LLP ("Former Auditor") to MNP LLP ("Successor Auditor") effective May 25, 2017. At the request of the Company the Former Auditor resigned as the auditor of the Company effective May 25, 2017 and the board of directors of the Company appointed the Successor Auditor as the Company's auditor effective May 25, 2017, until the next Annual General Meeting of the Company.

"We would like thank UHY McGovern, Hurley, Cunningham LLP for all their expertise and guidance over the last few years and we are pleased to announce that MNP LLP will be a part of the Hydropothecary story in the next stage of our growth," said Sébastien St-Louis, Co-Founder and CEO.

There were no reservations in the Former Auditor's audit reports for the period commencing at the beginning of THCX's two most recent financial years and ending at the date of the resignation of the Former Auditor. There are no "reportable events" (as the term is defined in National Instrument 51-102 - Continuous Disclosure Obligations) between the Company and the Former Auditor.

In accordance with National Instrument 51-102, the notice of change of auditor, together with the required letters from the former auditor and the successor auditor, have been reviewed by the board of directors and filed on SEDAR.

About The Hydropothecary Corporation

The Hydropothecary Corporation is an authorized licensed producer and distributor of medical cannabis licensed by Health Canada under the Access to Cannabis for Medical Purposes Regulations (Canada). Hydropothecary provides naturally grown and rigorously tested medical cannabis of uncompromising quality. Hydropothecary's branding, cannabis product offering, patient service standards and product pricing are consistent with THCX's positioning as a premium brand for a legal source for medical cannabis within this new marketplace. In addition to medical cannabis production and sales, Hydropothecary explores various research and development opportunities for cannabinoid extracts, drugs and combinatory chemistry. In addition, the company is investigating the development and patenting of novel technologies related to medical cannabis, as well as the import and export of medical cannabis.

Forward-Looking Information

This press release contains forward-looking information based on current expectations. Examples of such forward-looking information include statements about future operational and production capacity, the impact of enhanced facilities and production capabilities, and expected available product selection. These statements should not be read as guarantees of future performance or results. Such statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from those implied by such statements, including factors such as the ability to finance the proposed expansion through internal and/or external sources. The company assumes no responsibility to update or revise forward-looking information to reflect new events or circumstances unless required by law.