An internal workplace review of the Calgary Police Service has revealed claims of sexual assault, sexual harassment, bullying and intimidation, and a workplace culture that’s left some officers too fearful to formally complain.

The review, completed in 2013 and obtained by Postmedia, further details how the culture makes men and women often feel punished when they bring issues forward, or even when they request flexible work schedules.

Some women also reported feeling their chances for promotion were lost when they became pregnant.

“Both males and females shared instances of workplace bullying and harassment,” according to the human resources report, written by an independent auditor.

“Both men and women reported they did not bring these concerns forward in any formal way because the culture is one of intimidation and retaliation.”

Officers echoed those concerns in interviews with Postmedia, including one current female member who said seven officers texted her photos of their genitals after working shifts together.

In another incident, she claims a co-worker grabbed her head without warning and shoved it into his crotch, telling her to “do something useful.”

Senior police officials say they’ve taken strides to combat the issues outlined in the 2013 review, including the creation of the “Office of Inclusion,” a department existing specifically to receive and process complaints related to workplace culture.

The office is also working with the University of Calgary’s gender studies program to better understand workplace culture issues.

Police Chief Roger Chaffin said addressing the state of workplace culture and gender equity issues is a priority but will take time.

“It’s a new office, so it’s not a magic wand I can wave and say to trust it,” Chaffin said.

“We’re making headway, we see a lot of employees, we deal with a lot of issues.”

Though the report raises claims of sexual assault within the force, the service says no one has come forward to file a complaint.

“(Once) I have someone to step forward and say, ‘This happened to me and this is the situation,’ then we can go and find out what the facts are and investigate it,” Chaffin said.

Details of the review emerged the same month the RCMP announced a historic apology as part of a settlement with plaintiffs in two proposed class-action lawsuits alleging systemic gender-based harassment and discrimination within the national police force.

CPS’ workplace review was ordered by then-chief Rick Hanson as a “result of a number of concerns brought to his attention” regarding practices related to the human resources section of the service.

An independent auditor interviewed 65 CPS employees in 2012 and 2013 to get a handle on the effectiveness of HR and the general situation of the workplace culture and gender-equity issues in the force. The results weren’t made public until recently.

While the report found “many examples of the good work that the Human Resources Section has done and is currently doing,” it also flags examples of “when things did not go as hoped or planned.”

The report cited a culture of “intimidation and retaliation” that kept both men and women from formally reporting their concerns.

At the end of the day, it’s hard to act on people’s perceptions

The auditor found the submission of formal reports “was perceived to be unsafe in terms of their career to do so. In fact, it was often the perpetrator who reminded them that it would be unsafe to report incidents and that nothing would be done.”

Interviewees also reported they didn’t trust human resources to process a complaint without negative implication on them, “despite there being examples of serious bullying and/or harassment, acts of discrimination . . . and acts of criminal behaviour including sexual assaults.”

Indeed, during the review, some staff requested to meet the auditor outside city limits. One officer asked the auditor to wear a disguise so their peers wouldn’t know they were meeting.

Another reason some CPS staff said they didn’t raise complaints was the perception perpetrators aren’t sufficiently dealt with, because of what was perceived to be “powerful connections.” The report also noted many female officers felt like they had “1,000 stab wounds” from workplace interactions, and that they felt like they were punished for becoming pregnant.

Nineteen per cent of the CPS sworn members are female, while 67 per cent of its civilian staff are women.

“The female members who had children consistently reported their acceptance on the job ended at the point they became pregnant,” the auditor wrote.

“Upon announcing their pregnancy, a few of those I spoke to were able to be accommodated in a safe environment within their workplace, which was acceptable to them and allowed them to continue their work.

“However the majority were told the only placements for them were at front counters, which has traditionally had a negative stigma that is hard to get past, offers less than challenging work tasks and, in fact, as some suggested, were not particularly safe.”

The auditor said some of the women wanted to return to work on a job-share or part-time basis, but were reportedly challenged by such statements as, “My wife came back full time.”

One officer, who spoke to Postmedia under the condition of anonymity, burst into tears when talking about the rumours co-workers spread when she came back to work after taking time off to deal with family issues.

Nina Vaughan, the first head of the Office of Inclusion, said it has taken strides by handling many formal complaints, working on bias and leadership training, increasing the use of subject matter experts in HR and working with the University of Calgary’s gender studies program.

“At the end of the day, it’s hard to act on people’s perceptions,” said Vaughan.

“All we can do is put the processes in place, which I believe we have in place, for people to come forward, and hope that they do or that they can explain why they won’t.”

Speaking to the progress the Office of Inclusion has made, Vaughan said, “I feel really good, It’s been very positive and hopeful with the amount that has gone into most of the recommendations in that report.”

But while the CPS says it’s taken strides to combat the issues outlined in the 2013 review, five officers interviewed by Postmedia say they haven’t seen a noticeable change in the workplace culture since the report came out, and are still afraid to speak out.

The officer who said she received photos of her co-workers’ genitals still hasn’t formally come forward because the culture of fear remains prevalent.

She said when she had reported previous experiences to her superiors, they either didn’t know how to handle her situation or didn’t handle it at all.

I have spent most of my career terrified that if I complain, or even am vocal about these things, that I will be the one in trouble

“When I joined the job, the people I worked with made it clear that reporting behaviour that you were offended by was not acceptable and would only ruin your career,” said the officer.

“I have spent most of my career terrified that if I complain, or even am vocal about these things, that I will be the one in trouble.”

Other officers interviewed by Postmedia, including Marlene Hope, who worked on the Office of Inclusion until she quit in 2015, called the office “a Band-Aid solution” that wasn’t effectively solving deep-seated issues in the force’s culture.

“If they dealt with the issues appropriately, we would probably have very few reoffenders, but because we never dealt with it, people didn’t even know where the line was anymore, they kept crossing it,” said Hope.

“The reality is, this is absolutely not just a gender issue. The culture that exists impacts everyone.”

Chaffin said finding a way to get officers to trust the organization and come forward with their complaints is a long process.

“It’s a very important topic, and just because we didn’t see anyone come forward it does not make us naive (enough) to suggest that there’s nothing there,” said Chaffin.

“When people feel uncomfortable coming forward, that’s something we still have to work on every day.”