The LA Galaxy family is growing.

On Tuesday, defender A.J. DeLaGarza and his wife Megan announced via Instagram that they are expecting their second child.

A photo posted by AJ DeLaGarza (@ajd_20) on Mar 31, 2015 at 7:32pm PDT

Megan learned of the pregnancy in February just before the Galaxy’s trip to Europe and after some peaceful reflection made the announcement on Tuesday through their social media channels. The news comes months after the untimely passing of the couple’s first son Luca due to a congenital birth defect called Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome.

Last year, the American soccer community rallied around the DeLaGarza family and Luca by trumpeting their personal message, “#LucaKnowsHeart” and on Tuesday night at the announcement of a second child, the support flowed once again.

“Everyone has been on the journey with us over the last year,” DeLaGarza told LAGalaxy.com on Wednesday after the team’s practice. “Everyone is ecstatic and happy, and right now we just want to hope for the best.”

To honor the memory of their late son, the DeLaGarzas have been active in charity work with the Ronald McDonald House, Children’s Hospital of Los Angeles and the American Heart Association to support other families who have endured similar hardships. For his diligent charity work, DeLaGarza was honored with the 2014 Major League Soccer Humanitarian of the Year Award at the conclusion of last season.

This year, A.J. and Megan have remained active in their charitable exploits even organizing a donation drive for the Ronald McDonald House of Washington, D.C. prior to LA’s recent match with D.C. United.

The collection drive was a massive success as soccer fans from across the Washington, D.C. area donated a slew of items to the organization that housed the DeLaGarza family during their child’s brave fight.

And as the family prepares to have their second child, DeLaGarza knows that Luca will be smiling down watching over his parents and his new brother or sister as they embark upon another journey.

“I’ve told my wife that we have to be excited for this one because we know that Luca will always watch down on him or her.”

Adam Serrano is the LA Galaxy Insider. Read his blog at www.LAGalaxy.com/insider and contact him at LAGalaxyInsider@Gmail.com.