From Texas Instruments Wiki

For other versions of Code Composer Studio go here.

Overview

is the first version of CCS to be based on the latest version of Eclipse with no modifications (‘Stock Eclipse’). This allows customers to integrate a wider range of 3rd party plugins (as compared to CCSv4.x) and allows upgrades of open source components of CCS.

There are also many other improvements including improvements in performance, usability and stability.

Customers with using older versions of CCS (v4/v3) with valid maintenance subscriptions will be able to upgrade to CCSv5. CCSv5.1 and 5.2 are based on the Indigo Eclipse release train while CCSv5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 are based on Juno (3.8).

What's New in CCSv5

What's new in CCSv5 : Presentation that covers what the main changes (and new features) are in CCSv5.1 from a CCSv4.x perspective.

: Presentation that covers what the main changes (and new features) are in CCSv5.1 from a CCSv4.x perspective. CCSv5 Changes : Wiki topic that covers what the main changes (and new features) are in CCSv5.1 from a CCSv4.x perspective.

: Wiki topic that covers what the main changes (and new features) are in CCSv5.1 from a CCSv4.x perspective. Moving from CCSv3 to CCSv5: Presentation geared towards the experienced CCSv3 user who is moving to CCSv5. Highlights the key differences between the two environments.

Getting Started

CCS Getting Started Guides are an excellent way for a new user to get familiar with the basics of the CCS environment. The main goal is to get a new user running on CCS as quickly as possible.

Training

The CCSv5 Training page is the best place to look for training collateral specific to CCS.

If you are looking for more information on TI-RTOS Kernel (SYS/BIOS), then the TI-RTOS Kernel workshop is appropriate. It starts with an introduction to TI-RTOS and the TI-RTOS Kernel and then shows how to use them within CCS.

Support

Please use the following resources for support:

Download

The CCS Download Site provides access to CCSv5 download images.