armond bennett

Armond Bennett, the man shot in the head by New Orleans police Officer Lisa Lewis during an Algiers traffic stop last August, has filed a federal lawsuit claiming Lewis had "absolutely no reason or justification" for the shooting.

(Orleans Parish Sheriff's Office)

Armond Bennett, the man shot in the head by New Orleans police Officer Lisa Lewis during an Algiers traffic stop last August, has filed a federal lawsuit claiming Lewis had "absolutely no reason or justification" for the shooting.

The civil rights lawsuit, filed Thursday (July 30), also accuses Lewis and her partner, Officer Patrick Guidry, of "concocting a false and misleading story" about the Aug. 10 shooting, which police initially failed to publicly disclose.

"These defendants falsely claimed that they only heard gun shots in the area, not that defendant Lewis had unjustifiably fired her gun twice at Mr. Bennett for no good reason," the lawsuit claims. "Alternatively, these defendants may have falsely claimed that Mr. Bennett fought with defendant Lewis and/or committed other acts that allegedly justified her use of force."

One of the two shots fired by Lewis during the Aug. 10 "sliced across his scalp," the lawsuit states. He spent four days in the hospital. The shooting drew considerable outcry, not only for the circumstances surrounding it, but also because police did not notify the public about it until two days later -- after it was reported by NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune. Not long after, then-NOPD Superintendent Ronal Serpas announced his retirement from the department.

Bennett and Lewis first crossed paths 10 days earlier in the parking lot of a dialysis clinic, where, the lawsuit states, Bennett worked as a security guard. She and Officer Lucretia Gantner stopped Bennett, who was driving his brother's car at the time, for having an obscured license plate, according to an arrest warrant previously obtained by NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune.

Lewis smelled marijuana coming from the car, she wrote in the warrant, and asked Bennett about the gun holster Gantner spotted on the floor in the backseat. Bennett said he was required to carry a weapon as part of his job, the lawsuit states, but it was not in the car at the time of the traffic stop.

Lewis' arrest warrant application characterizes Bennett as "stalling" as he looked for his license and registration. But in the lawsuit, Bennett claims to have told the officers he couldn't find the registration because the car belonged to his brother.

According to the lawsuit, Bennett started to exit the car - upon direction of Lewis - when he reached to place his phone in the car's center console.

"Although Mr. Bennett had been cooperative and polite to the officers throughout the stop, defendant Gantner suddenly drew her weapon and started shouting for Mr. Bennett to show his hands," the lawsuit states.

Lewis wrote in the arrest warrant that she and Gantner saw a gun in Bennett's hands, but the lawsuit claims that a gun was not inside the car and that neither officer saw one.

Grabbing Bennett by his hair and wrist, Lewis pulled him out of the car, the lawsuit states.

"Terrified, Mr. Bennett ran away from the officers in fear of his life," the lawsuit states.

Bennett escaped capture during that initial encounter. Ten days later, he and his brother were sitting in his brother's car outside Bennett's Algiers home when Lewis and Guidry drove up. With guns drawn, the two officers ordered the men to exit the car, the lawsuit says.

"Suddenly, and without reason, justification or provocation, defendant Lewis pulled the trigger on her weapon and shot at Mr. Bennett," the lawsuit states. "Mr. Bennett had done nothing to provoke this use of excessive and deadly force."

Bennett stumbled as he ran from the officers, the lawsuit says, and Lewis fired the second shot that struck him. Neither officer activated their body cameras before the shooting, police said at the time, and the squad car's dash cam was also not activated.

Bennett ran to his uncle's house and was later taken to the hospital. After his release from the hospital, he was booked in connection with the initial parking lot traffic stop. Those charges - marijuana possession, simple criminal damage to property and illegal carrying of a weapon with a controlled substance - were later dismissed, the lawsuit says.

All three officers are named defendants in Bennett's civil rights lawsuit. So, too, are former Chief Serpas, current Superintendent Michael Harrison and the city.