The mother of two children injured while crossing an unmarked crosswalk last week is trying to accept the fact the driver who struck her kids and fled may never be found, as police officers continue to investigate the “hugely” challenging hit-and-run.

Just minutes after Amber Chinery’s three children — an 11-year-old boy, 9-year-old boy, and his 9-year-old twin sister — set off for a quick walk to their before-school program on Nov. 20, Chinery said her door flew open and her nine-year-old son told her that his siblings had been hit by a vehicle.

“I ran to the scene and they were on the ground, people were around them covering them with blankets, keeping them still,” Chinery said.

The three kids were crossing the street in an unmarked crosswalk at Berkley Drive N.W. and Bermondsey Way shortly before 7:40 a.m. last Friday when a man driving a light-coloured pickup truck north on Bermondsey Way ran a stop sign and struck two of the children, then fled the scene.

The victims were rushed to hospital with a variety of injuries — the 9-year-old girl sustained a broken femur and is expected to be in a pink full body cast for more than two months, while her 11-year-old brother suffered a broken shoulder, soft tissue damage, lung injury and road rash.

“According to my children, the person didn’t make any attempt to slow down. He mowed them right over,” Chinery said.

“The fact this person is still out there with such disregard for human life, it could happen again…He definitely knows what happened and he needs to face up to it. He needs to be off the road.”

Chinery said her nine-year-old son was not injured in the hit-and-run but is dealing with guilt over the fact he wasn’t able to push his twin sister and older brother out of the way of the vehicle.

Chinery is begging the person who struck and injured her children to come forward to police, but knows the driver may never be found or charged.

“We’ve been told the chances of catching this person are pretty slim,” she said.

“We’re trying to find a new way to find closure…My kids have shown me so much as far as how strong even the littlest person could be in the face of something like this. Neither one of them cry, neither one of them complain about their pain.”

Chinery said she’s trying hard not to be angry and has found solace in the support that’s poured in from community members and strangers.

After nearly a week in hospital, Chinery’s daughter came home on Wednesday and her son was expected to be released from hospital late Thursday. Both face a long road to recovery, including months of physiotherapy.

“I’m thankful they’re alive. It could have been completely different,” Chinery said.

While officers from two different units are continuing to work on the hit-and-run, acting Staff Sgt. Colin Foster with the traffic section said Thursday the case is proving to be difficult and neither the vehicle, or a suspect, has been located.

“It’s a very challenging collision in that there is a considerable lack of evidence in this one,” he said.

Foster said police have received several tips about the case but so far, the only witnesses investigators have are the three children who were involved.

Based on the description officers have of the vehicle involved and the scene of the collision, police believe damage to the pickup truck would be minimal.

“The biggest problem we’ve got is physically being able to put any vehicle we do find to the collision,” Foster said.

“We need to get some sort of physical evidence or admission from the driver that he’s the one responsible.”

In addition to urging the driver to come forward, police are asking anybody who witnessed the collision, or saw the vehicle immediately before or after the hit-and-run to contact police.

“As time goes on, we won’t forgot about this, we’ll keep investigating it,” Foster said.

AKlingbeil@calgaryherald.com