A cab driver is suing the city of New Orleans in civil court, saying he was falsely arrested and imprisoned, and now video of the incident has been made public.Raw video: Video released in cab driver video voyeurism caseWatch reportThe case involves a local lawyer now charged with lying to investigators about the incident.In September, the WDSU I-Team broke the story that Jennifer Gaubert was charged with lying to investigators after she claimed taxi cab driver Hervey Farrell secretly video taped her in a compromising position and then tried to blackmail her. Farrell was initially arrested by the NOPD.But the district attorney in Orleans Parish dropped the charges against Farrell and instead charged Gaubert with lying.Gaubert is still awaiting trial on the felony charge of lying to prosecutors; that case will be heard next month.But the 33-year-old was found guilty of a misdemeanor last week by Municipal Court Judge Paul Sens.Sens made that ruling after hearing from Farrell and viewing the video tape in question.In it you see Gaubert hop from the back seat of the cab to the front and start a line of explicit questioning with the cab driver.In the civil filing Farrell claims the NOPD did not investigate properly, and that he was arrested without cause and held at OPP for almost two days.He also claims he suffered emotional stress and loss his job over the incident, an incident the DA now says he was the victim in.Related:Woman accused of fabricating story of taxi driver extortionSign up for our email newsletters to get breaking news right in your inbox. Click here to sign up!

A cab driver is suing the city of New Orleans in civil court, saying he was falsely arrested and imprisoned, and now video of the incident has been made public.

Raw video: Video released in cab driver video voyeurism case

Watch report

The case involves a local lawyer now charged with lying to investigators about the incident.

In September, the WDSU I-Team broke the story that Jennifer Gaubert was charged with lying to investigators after she claimed taxi cab driver Hervey Farrell secretly video taped her in a compromising position and then tried to blackmail her. Farrell was initially arrested by the NOPD.

But the district attorney in Orleans Parish dropped the charges against Farrell and instead charged Gaubert with lying.

Gaubert is still awaiting trial on the felony charge of lying to prosecutors; that case will be heard next month.

But the 33-year-old was found guilty of a misdemeanor last week by Municipal Court Judge Paul Sens.

Sens made that ruling after hearing from Farrell and viewing the video tape in question.

In it you see Gaubert hop from the back seat of the cab to the front and start a line of explicit questioning with the cab driver.

In the civil filing Farrell claims the NOPD did not investigate properly, and that he was arrested without cause and held at OPP for almost two days.

He also claims he suffered emotional stress and loss his job over the incident, an incident the DA now says he was the victim in.

Related:

Woman accused of fabricating story of taxi driver extortion

Sign up for our email newsletters to get breaking news right in your inbox. Click here to sign up!

AlertMe