Note: this new system is for reproducible bug reports. It is not a support forum for general issues/complaints. If you spam the bug report platform, we won't be able to response as quickly. So, please only submit a bug report if you have an actual bug to report. Thanks!

Hey everyone,As you probably know, we have a pretty robust beta program that allows you to follow our software updates and provide feedback, every step of the way. We also have a comprehensive internal testing process for both hardware and software. This means that every OnePlus product goes through extensive testing before ever being distributed. Today, we hope to make that process even better.Starting today, you can submit official bug reports for OnePlus devices and OxygenOS (open beta builds and official releases). Go check it out here:Why are we doing this? First of all, there's that whole community thing, and we want to make it easier for you to let us know if something is broken. It's also about improving our hardware and software as efficiently as possible, and we've made this new Bug Report platform particularly powerful in a few important ways:Before, it wasn't super easy for us to find and verify bugs. People would submit bugs informally on the forums, on our social media, or through our customer service channels. We'd then have to reach out and gather information manually, which was a slow and imperfect process. With this new system, we'll have logs, reproduction steps, images, and more right from the beginning. This means that we can reproduce and squash bugs much faster.You can go see the bugs that everyone else has submitted, and whether or not they have been addressed. This is a risky thing for a company to do, but we're doing it. This is our way of showing how serious we are about addressing your concerns and making our products even better.Not only are bug reports publicly visible, but you can also see whether or not each bug has been reproduced, and how close we are to fixing it. Every bug report will be followed up on by a OnePlus product and/or customer service representative.When you submit a bug report, other users can "watch" the bug to let us know how many users are experiencing the same issue. This way, we'll immediately know if an issue is affecting a lot of people, so we can quickly find real bugs and fix them as quickly as possible.It's about streamlining our processes. It's about making our hardware and software even better. Most importantly, It's about giving you an even bigger voice. Go ahead and check it out now.Never Settle.