Holding on its commitment to offer 25 electrified models, 12 of which will be purely electric, by 2025, BMW will showcase five electric vehicles at the upcoming 2017 Los Angeles Auto Show including the North American premieres of the BMW i Vision Dynamics, MINI Electric Concept, BMW i3s, and a world premiere vehicle that will be shown during the BMW Group press conference on November 29. In addition, the BMW M3 CS will also make its world premiere, and the BMW X7 SAV Concept and the BMW 6 Series Gran Turismo will make their North American premieres. The BMW 8 Series Concept and the all-new BMW M5 will also be featured.

Also Read: BMW Unveils New i3S Electric Sports Edition Ahead Of Frankfurt Motor Show Debut

New BMW i3s

The new BMW i3s is a sportier and more powerful variant of the BMW i3. The first ever BMW i3s features an output 181 bhp electric motor that generates peak torque of 269 NM. The BMW i3s accelerates from 0-100 kmph in 6.8 seconds and has a top speed of 160 kmph. The BMW i3s uses a lithium-ion high-voltage battery developed by BMW with a cell capacity of 94 Ah. The BMW i3s has also incorporated recycled plastics, renewable raw materials, natural fibres, and open-pored, unbleached eucalyptus wood in its design. The new BMW i3s will be available in U.S. showrooms in November, 2017. Pricing will be announced closer to market launch.

BMW C-Evolution Scooter

BMW Motorrad will also present the BMW C-Evolution Scooter. The electrically powered maxi-scooter has a riding range of up to 159 kms. The C-Evolution scooter has a top speed of 128 kmph and travels from 0 to 50 kmph in a just 2.8 seconds. The BMW C-Evolution Scooter will be available in California showrooms next year.

(MINI will showcase its take on future personal mobility in the city)

BMW 8 Series Concept

The BMW 8 Series Concept marks the long-awaited return of the BMW 8 Series. The BMW 8 Series Concept combines razor-sharp dynamics and modern luxury, and is a precursor to the BMW 8 Series Coupe that's scheduled for launch in 2018.

Also Read: BMW 8 Series Concept Breaks Cover

BMW X7 iPerformance Concept

The BMW X7 iPerformance Concept introduces a new model concept for the premium segment that utilizes BMW eDrive technology with a BMW TwinPower Turbo petrol engine creating an efficient plug-in hybrid powertrain which runs on zero emissions. With a generously-sized, six-person interior, the BMW X7 iPerformance Concept offers an interior with a state-of-the-art infotainment system.

Also Read: BMW Concept X7 iPerformance Previewed Ahead Of Debut At Frankfurt

2018 BMW 6 Series Gran Turismo

The all-new BMW 6 Series Gran Turismo is offered exclusively in the BMW 640i xDrive variant and has a distinct coupe-inspired aerodynamic design. Featuring the BMW TwinPower Turbo technology, the 6-cylinder inline petrol engine generates maximum output of 330 bhp and peak torque of 450 NM, accelerating from 0-100 kmph in just 5.1 seconds. This comes paired to the standard 8-Speed Steptronic Sport automatic transmission with paddle shifters. Moreover, the BMW 6 series GT comes with active kidney grille, air curtains, air breathers and active rear spoiler, a double wishbone front suspension, and standard rear air suspension.

Also Read: 2018 BMW 6 Series GT Revealed

MINI Electric

Fully electric vehicles will run across the BMW portfolio and MINI will showcase its take on future personal mobility in the city with the North American premiere of the MINI Electric Concept. Designed for use in urban areas, this MINI Electric Concept vehicle offers a preview into how pure-electric day-to-day mobility might look in the years ahead. MINI will present an all-electric series-production model in 2019.

For the latest auto news and reviews, follow CarAndBike on Twitter, Facebook, and subscribe to our YouTube channel.