



Lady Kahina Tijani Loren's unofficial entourage began a tour of the outer gas giants in the Sol system. Hundreds of privately owned Federation-registered vessels turned out to greet the Senator, in lieu of an official welcome, as she continued her passage through the Sol system despite continued apathy from officials.



Chancellor Blaine made a rare appearance at a Senate meeting in order to address remarks made earlier in the week by Senator Denton Patreus. "It is with regret that I must deny the honourable Senator’s request to access the Emperor’s medical records," he said . As has always been the case, for reasons of national security the Emperor’s medical records are only accessible by the Emperor’s personal physicians. I will continue to act in the Emperor’s stead, according to his will. As for the question of succession, that will be addressed when the situation calls for it and not before."



The Kappa Fornacis Farmers Union was up to its old tricks again, as news started to come out of the region that Onionhead is once again available in the ports around Panem. In a brief written statement submitted to GalNet news, Commander Virgil Kyle, of the exploration-fitted Asp, Spirit of Indianapolis, claimed to have been the first to visit what he called Sol's ‘true North Star’. "Wregoe TV-L C24-0 is over 1,200 light-years north of Sol's position in the galactic plane, and less than a light-year from her position otherwise," he explained. "Due to the jump distances involved, the system can only be visited by Asps and Anacondas fitted to achieve near-maximum jump ranges."Lady Kahina Tijani Loren's unofficial entourage began a tour of the outer gas giants in the Sol system. Hundreds of privately owned Federation-registered vessels turned out to greet the Senator, in lieu of an official welcome, as she continued her passage through the Sol system despite continued apathy from officials.Chancellor Blaine made a rare appearance at a Senate meeting in order to address remarks made earlier in the week by Senator Denton Patreus. "It is with regret that I must deny the honourable Senator’s request to access the Emperor’s medical records,". As has always been the case, for reasons of national security the Emperor’s medical records are only accessible by the Emperor’s personal physicians. I will continue to act in the Emperor’s stead, according to his will. As for the question of succession, that will be addressed when the situation calls for it and not before."