

Although the fossilized traces of life discovered on Mars by NASA’s Curiosity Rover do not refer to solid proof like bones, Nora Noffke, a geobiologists, claims that some of the rock formations photographed on the Red Planet show structural similarities with the ones known to be responsible for the formation of life on our planet.

Noffke made these statements after seeing a photo taken by the Curiosity Rover at the Gillespie Lake outcrop, located in the Yellowknife Bay area that’s around the Gale Crater. Noffke said that, theoretically, that would have been a perfect place for Martian life forms. Previously, the Rover has proved that there was once water on Mars and the area explored right now was actually a lake that dried.

Some scientists believe that although it may look like there was once life on Mars, no one can really tell for sure because the proof is still inconsistent. Noffke agrees with that but says that this is her hypothesis and the evidence is there and she thinks there is plenty of evidence that could mean life once existed on Mars.

Chris McKay, a NASA planetary scientist, said it although no one has any real proof that could confirm that life exists or has ever existed on Mars, but he does find Noffke’s examination of the photos taken by the Curiosity Rover very intense.

McKay said that he has seen many papers comparing rock formations from Mars with rock formations from Earth, but that’s not enough evidence to say that there was once life on the Red Planet. But Kiffke analysis of the rock formations is the most carefully done, so that’s the reason it was published in the renowned Astrobiology Magazine.

Noffke explained that she began analyzing once she spotted something in the photos that resembled fossilized life. She said that she spent many weeks investigating certain photos, centimeter by centimeter, and compared them to terrestrial structures.

The photos showed that the terrestrial and Martian sedimentary structures are morphologically similar. Also, some patterns found in the Gillespie Lake outcrop show similarities with the microbial structures found on Earth.

Image Source: heytoday