May approaches - a significant month for US telly-watchers, since it's when we'll learn which shows are getting the axe and which will be sticking around through 2015.

It's a painful process - all the more so for us cult TV fans, so all-encompassing is the obsession we have with our favourite sci-fi and fantasy series.

Whether you're hoping for the best or steeling yourself for bad news, here are a few pointers on what to expect - the Week in Geek odds on cult shows potentially facing cancellation.

What's axed? What's renewed? The 2014-15 season USTV scorecard

Marvel's Agents of SHIELD - 4/1 shot at renewal



Yes, critical reaction has been mixed. Yes, ratings have dipped by more than 6m viewers since the pilot. But the power of Mighty Marvel - chiefly ABC's ties with the Disney-owned comic giant - means that Agents of SHIELD is guaranteed at least a second season.

Showrunners Maurissa Tancharoen and Jed Whedon have talked up plans for a wrap-up Kickstarter movie - Veronica Mars-style - if the show is axed, but it's highly doubtful they'll have to rely on fan funding any time soon.

Community - 6/1 shot at renewal



The little cult sitcom that could, we're quietly confident that at least one half of the Community fan mantra ("Six seasons and a movie!") will come true next month.

Even the show's creator - loveable cynic Dan Harmon - admitted recently that, at this point, "the only thing weirder [than a renewal]... would be not getting a sixth season," adding: "If we get a sixth season, they owe us a movie, right?"

Hannibal - 10/1 shot at renewal



Prestige is a surprisingly powerful force in US network television - critical acclaim can help keep a show on in the air even if its audience numbers aren't exactly stellar.

The likelihood of Hannibal getting a third season then is reasonably strong. Its ratings on Friday nights are low but not disastrously so, while the critics simply can't get enough - so chances of survival are, if not high, then at least moderate.

Revolution - 25/1 shot at renewal



It's popular consensus that, on a creative level, the second season of Revolution has been stronger than the first. But unfortunately that surge in quality hasn't translated into higher viewing figures - while the first run never dipped below 5.5m, recent episodes have seen the show at just above 4m.

This dystopian sci-fi series is far from a lame duck, but its continued survival depends on the quality of NBC's drama pilots this season. If a new show impresses the execs, then Revolution could get the chop.

Almost Human - 40/1 shot at renewal

Liane Hentscher Fox



Karl Urban's futuristic thriller drew decent but far from spectacular numbers when it aired its initial 13-episode run and Fox has been known to stick by an underdog sci-fi series before - just think of Almost Human creator Joel Wyman's previous effort Fringe.

But that 13-episode tally is concerning - Fox wasn't willing to order a full first season of Almost Human, so will it be willing to order a second? Again, this show's fate is tied to the network's 2014-15 pilot slate - it'll be back only if Fox can't find a suitable replacement.

Dracula - 50/1 shot at renewal



A series average of 3.2m ain't great - even on NBC - and with Katie McGrath jumping ship to play with dinosaurs, you'd be forgiven for writing Dracula off.

But there is the tiniest glimmer of hope for the paranormal drama's fanatical fanbase - Jonathan Rhys Meyers' blood-soaked exploits have proven popular with international audiences. Since Dracula is a co-production with UK broadcaster Sky Living, that might just be enough to save it.

Its pulse may be faint, but Dracula isn't dead yet.

Intelligence - 66/1 shot at renewal



Even the presence of charismatic Lost veteran Josh Holloway and some "beautiful, strong character ladies" (Josh's words, not ours!) couldn't stop spy-fi series Intelligence from sinking.

While its pilot attracted an impressive 16.5m, it lost over 10m of those viewers in week two - and the ratings drop-off hasn't stopped. Numbers around the 5m mark aren't enough to save you on CBS.

The Tomorrow People - 80/1 shot at renewal

Jack Rowand



One of only a few shows not renewed by The CW back in February, this sci-fi revamp's future was very much dependent on how the network's latest effort The 100 performed.

Unfortunately for Robbie Amell and co, while The 100 has been pulling in solid audiences of around 2m, The Tomorrow People recently dipped to less than half that. Sorry guys, but this show is toast.

Beauty and the Beast - 100/1 shot at renewal



Kristin Kreuk's fantasy romance / crime procedural has been attracting under 900k viewers, week-in week-out, and now its been put on a mid-season hiatus of almost three months.

It'll be back in the summer to air season two's final episodes, but a third run is just... not... happening.

Which of these cult shows should be saved? And which deserves the axe? Share your thoughts below!