This article is over 4 years old

At least five people have contracted the infection in the food scare, prompting Victorian company Patties Foods to expand its recall

More frozen berry products have been recalled due to possible hepatitis A contamination, with at least five people contracting the infection in the food scare.

Victorian company Patties Foods announced on Sunday it was expanding its recall to include all 300g and 500g packs of Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries.

On Saturday, all 1kg packs of Nanna’s Frozen Mixed Berries were recalled when the Victorian Health Department warned of a potential hepatitis A contamination.

Patties Foods CEO Steven Chaur said the wider recall was a precautionary measure.

“We have decided that all our frozen mixed berries should be recalled until such time as we receive the results of further laboratory tests,” Chaur said. “The recall is an important step to ensure public safety and confidence.”

The suspect berries were packed in China before distribution in Australia.

At least three people in Victoria, and two in NSW, who have eaten the frozen berries have since been diagnosed with hepatitis A.

Symptoms include abdominal pain, nausea and fever as well as yellow skin and eyes, and anyone experiencing these symptoms are urged to see a doctor.

“An investigation by all health agencies is underway but at this early stage we are not sure how many people may be affected,” said Dr Vicky Shepherd, director of NSW Health’s communicable diseases branch.

“There is the potential that others may be sick with hepatitis A now, or develop the disease over the coming weeks.”

Supermarkets have been told to pull all of the recalled berry products from sale. Households that have the recalled products in their freezer are advised to bin them or return them to the place of purchase for a cash refund.

Hepatitis A is spread when traces of faecal matter containing the virus come in contact with hands, water or food and then enter a person’s mouth.

The hepatitis A scare comes as a number of Victorian hospitals are told to dispose of chocolate mousse, which has been found to contain listeria.

Hospitals are contacting patients who might have consumed the dessert recently, though no cases of illness have been reported and the product is not supplied to the public. The contamination came to light after the company conducted routine testing of its products.

Listeria is particularly dangerous for pregnant women, their unborn babies and the elderly.

Concerned consumers can call Patties Foods on 1800 650 069.



Recalled

• Nanna’s Mixed Berries 1kg, up to and including Best Before Date 22/11/16

• Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries 300g, up to and including best before bate 10/12/17

• Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries 500g, up to and including best before date 06/10/17.