North of Ship Canal Ballard’s Fu Kun Wu is offering $6 drink specials all night on Monday. A DJ will provide tunes from 8:30 to midnight, with happy hour commencing at 5 and ending at 7. Costumes? Encouraged.

La Carta de Oaxaca and its new Queen Anne counterpart, Mezcaleria Oaxaca, are bringing in a live mariachi band on Monday as part of a Día de Muertos celebration. The music starts at Mezcaleria at 5 before moving on to Ballard around 6:15. You can also expect a special food menu.

The always festive Bottleneck Lounge hosts Halloween Triple Threat Scary Movie Night on the 31st. The screening of Tremors, Mars Attacks, and Army of Darkness gets underway at 6:30, with special cocktails to accompany each. Word has it the Kevin Bacon Manhattan with candied bacon strips is one not to miss. The popcorn’s provided.

On Monday stop by Pike Brewing in costume and score dollar discounts on the “devilishly spiced” Harlot’s Harvest Pumpkin Ale.

Another one for beer buffs: Redhook ‘s Haunted Brewery Bash. The $3.50 pint specials and two floors of live entertainment go down Saturday 8:30pm-midnight. Admission costs $10 (purchase them on Brown Paper Tickets or at the door), and sorry kiddies, this one’s 21-plus. We also hear of $1 keg pours and a costume contest.

Re-Bar promises “scary good beats” when jockeys Darek Mazzone of KEXP, DJ Rhythma, and DJ Darwin take the booth during its Saturday bash starting at 10pm. Tickets are $10 at the door. All proceeds benefit FIUTS; also 21 and over.

Vermillion is throwing a bash on Saturday, the same night the Hideout, the Sorrento, and Vito’s team up for the now-annual ER Costume Crawl. Expect live music and festivities at each. Best outfit wins $500, and nota bene: you’ve got to be wearing a getup to get in. Things kick off at 9pm. (Also: a reminder Vito’s is hosting another notable party Monday.)

Starting Friday at the CanCan the Heavenly Spies put on a saucy Halloween burlesque show, running through Saturday evening. Tickets go for $10 to $45.

What else?