Rachel Marshall, 42, had sex with the schoolboy in the car and then threatened him when he got a new girlfriend (Picture: Andrew Pierce/View Finder Pictures)

A ‘model’ mother who had weekly sex sessions with a schoolboy then threatened him when he ended their relationship has been jailed.

Rachel Marshall, 42, showered the teen with gifts, including money, aftershave and even an iPhone 6.

But when he started a relationship with a girl his own age, she threatened both of them and even pretended she was pregnant with his child, Caernarfon Crown Court heard.

Marshall plead guilty to four counts of sexual activity with a child between October 2014 and February 2015 and was jailed for 40 months.

The court heard how she sent the pair a fake baby scan and a pregnancy magazine and text the girl saying: ‘You are both f***ing dead.’

Prosecutor Simon Rogers said Marshall had started sending ‘flirtatious’ messages to the boy and eventually asked if he would like to go for a drive.

Advertisement

Advertisement

She picked him up near his home and they went to a car park on the Sychnant Pass, near Conwy, where Marshall spoke about difficulties in her marriage.

Marshall plead guilty to four counts of sexual activity with a child and was jailed for 40 months at Caernarfon Crown Court (Picture: Google maps)

The defendant then kissed the youngster and her behaviour escalated.

The pair had sex almost weekly including at Marshall’s home but the meetings were normally in her car.

Mr Rogers said: ‘His confidence in the situation began to deteriorate. The defendant became aware of this.

‘Her behaviour began to freak him out. She wouldn’t leave him alone. She was continually messaging him.

‘She would send naked photographs of herself to him and began contacting his friends.’

The barrister added that when the boy formed a relationship with a girl his own age, Marshall started claiming that he had made her pregnant.

Mr Rogers said it was ‘a deeply unpleasant course of harassment against the complainant and his girlfriend. It was done to manipulate him to continue the relationship with her.’

Following rumours at school, police went to the youngster’s home and he burst into tears. He said Marshall’s behaviour had a ‘profound’ effect.

Judge Heywood said Marshall was of previous good character and a mother and wife who had a succession of good jobs.

Advertisement

Advertisement

He said what happened had a ‘disastrous’ effect on the boy who had threatened suicide.

He told Marshall: ‘You knew this young man’s age and took advantage of the situation for your own desires.’

Defence barrister Sion at Mihangel said: ‘She is deeply sorry for what has taken place. She has lost her job, her husband and family.’

Marshall has since become pregnant and the baby will be born in a prison environment and could stay with her in jail for up to 18 months, the court heard.

Marshall must register as a sex offender and a sexual harm prevention order was made to protect the boy from her.