Posted on by Chris Brennan ---

In this episode Kelly Surtees and Austin Coppock join the show once again to talk about the major astrological aspects for the month of October 2015, as well as some of the most auspicious electional dates I could find that month.

During the course of the episode we cover Jupiter trine Pluto, Mars opposite Neptune, the pileup of planets in Virgo, Mercury stationing direct in Libra, Venus finishing up its post-retrograde shadow period, and more.

This episode was recorded in front of a live audience via out monthly webinar format, and the recording is available as either an audio only download or a video below. This was our first time using this format to record one of the monthly forecast episodes, so this was kind of an experiment and a learning process, although I think that it has a lot of potential for the future.

The audio only podcast episode version has been edited, and some work was done to improve the quality of the audio due to some issues we had during the live recording. The video is basically just the raw recording of the webinar, and it contains video from our webcams as well as some charts when we would share them on the screen, but the audio quality is a bit sketchy at different points in the show.

As always, the cover art for this episode is taken from the PlanetWatcher 2015 Astrological Calendar, which produced by astrologer Kirk Kahn.

Below you will find an outline of some of the different topics that we touched on during the course of the show, followed by links to download or stream the recording.

Announcements

Astrology News

Kepler College is getting ready to re-open its astrological library in Seattle, thanks to the work of Jenn Zahrt, Wonder Bright, Shannon Garcia. The library will be called the Maggie A. Nalbandian Memorial Library, in honor of the founder of Kepler College who passed away in June.

There is a new astrology-themed movie titled Changing of the Gods that recently launched a KickStarter campaign in order to fund the production and distribution of the film. The movie is based on the work of Richard Tarnas, uses the recent/current Uranus-Pluto square as a focal point, and will be narrated by John Cleese. As of the recording of this episode of the podcast they are about halfway to their goal of raising $100,000 via Kickstarter. They are shooting for a 2017 release date.

We are kicking around the idea of maybe putting on a conference sometime early next summer. We are trying to gauge how much interest there would be in contributors to the podcast putting on a conference, and if enough people would attend to make it successful. So, if you would be interested in attending something like that then please let us know.

Show Notes

Major aspects for the month: Jupiter trine Pluto, October 11 – 12, 13 Virgo/Capricorn Mars trine Pluto, October 16 – 17, 13 Virgo/Capricorn Mars conjunct Jupiter, October 17 – 18, 14 Virgo Triggers longer trends/themes to do with Pluto in Capricorn + Jupiter in Virgo. Keyword: productivity

It’s a very Virgo October. Venus, Mars, Jupiter visible in the early morning sky for much of the month. 2 superior planets + Venus who has been trying to get to Virgo for a while!

Also, many aspects across earth signs this month + Taurus Full Moon 4 Taurus October 27, close to Moon’s exaltation degree.

Venus rules Libra New Moon + Taurus Full Moon

Plus usual October aspects with Sun + Mercury in Libra square Pluto/opposite Uranus (Sun – Oct 6, 11, then Mercury Oct 22, 25)

Mars then Venus opposite Neptune 7 Pisces, Oct 6 + 16 (Sun trine Neptune October 30)

Venus square Saturn October 9 around 1 Virgo/Sagittarius

Mercury stations direct at 0 Libra around October 9/Venus out of shadow October 10.

People Magazine called this the summer of splits. Interesting Venus retro anecdote.

Immigration Crisis timing: Jupiter Opp Neptune, Saturn Square Neptune, Node soon to be copresent with Neptune. Results of the destabilizing effects of the Uranus-Pluto square over the past several years.



Auspicious Electional Dates for October

Unedited Video Version of the Episode

The unedited video version of the October forecast episode:

–

Edited Audio Version of the Episode

You can either play the audio version of this episode of the podcast directly from the website or download it as an MP3 to your computer by using the buttons below:

Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Reddit

Email

