The Waukegan Public Library's Early Learning Center opened a new space-themed exhibit Sunday.

More than 200 children under the age of 8 attended the opening of the "Blast Off!" exhibit, which included cupcakes and freeze-dried ice cream.

Park City sisters Ariana and Layla Teran played on a model lunar rover. Ariana, 7, who dressed in one of the provided astronaut costumes, said she enjoyed pretending to trek the moon with her sister.

"I feel like it's gonna be awesome going to space," Ariana said.

Waukegan mother Darnisha Ivy-Biggs said the Early Learning Center is a great place for her children to play while learning.

"We come to the library almost every single day because they love it here," Ivy-Biggs said.

Yadira Sanchez Olson / Lake County News-Sun The new Blast Off! exhibit at Waukegan Public Library opened on Sunday. The new Blast Off! exhibit at Waukegan Public Library opened on Sunday. (Yadira Sanchez Olson / Lake County News-Sun)

The exhibit features space-themed exhibits — such as a space capsule or black light room with constellations — that were designed to promote learning the alphabet and shape and color recognition, library spokeswoman Amanda Civitello said.

Through sponsorship from the North Shore Gas Company, the Waukegan Public Library presents a new exhibit each year that is built mostly by in-house engineers.

This year, a NASA display on the main floor of the library features artifacts from NASA's Lower Earth Orbit shuttle program.

"We're very fortunate to have that from NASA in Huntsville, Alabama," Civitello said.

The NASA exhibit features a 13-foot replica space shuttle, a seat from the shuttle Endeavour and a tire from the shuttle Columbia, Civitello said.

Blast Off! replaces the previous Fairy Tales exhibit and display.

Sunday's celebration included "Star Wars" characters, who were on hand to pose for photos. Rockford's Discovery Center Museum provided older children with hands-on activities.

Yadira Sanchez Olson is a freelance reporter for the News-Sun.