287

121 Essex St

New York , NY 10002



(212) 477-2998

The Whiskey Ward's one of my favorite bars in the world. It doesn't have the broadest selection of whiskies (that'd be Jack Rose in DC, or even Copper & Oak a few blocks away). It doesn't have the best prices (that'd be Avenue Pub in New Orleans). It isn't the prettiest, by a long shot (sorry, guys!). But it's the bar to which I return time and time again, and pretty much every time I have the pleasure of finding myself in New York. The Whiskey Ward's a place where I've enjoyed sampling many a dram with old friends. This is a classic, no-frills, quasi-dive bar that happens to have a hell of a whiskey collection. Wood paneling in abundance? Check. Chalkboards with the day's specials and the current bottles? Check. Barrels that double as tables? Double-check. One thing I appreciate about The Whiskey Ward, and wish more bars would do, is keep an up-to-date stock list on their website. Admittedly, it'd a lot of effort, and bottles will come in and out of rotation as they are finished. But as a true scotch fan, I enjoy poring over a menu and deciding what I want to try in advance -- or, for that matter, deciding whether a bar is even worth visiting. These guys have a healthy collection of rare and expensive bottles, although I think that they shine in the mid- to high-range, where they price their pours much more affordably than other New York establishments. I didn't splurge on my last trip there, but a 17-year old Signatory Cask Strength Laphroaig was mighty tempting. Whiskey Ward also features bottles from upstart American independent bottler Single Cask Nation and a lot of coveted bottles of American bourbon or rye, such as Kentucky Owl, Parker's Heritage, and Whistlepig Boss Hog Black Prince. One important note: The Whiskey Ward serves its whiskies with true 2-ounce pours, which is a rarity. In comparison, most of its competitors serve 1.5-ounce pours, and their price per pour is higher than this place. I'm not really sure how they do it, but I'm not going to complain about the wide range of high-end scotches that they offer at under $20. Even better, if you want to try more, you can ask for a 1-ounce pour for half the price.

Really nice low key bar with some of THE BEST liquor selection you can ask for. Great atmosphere and service to match. If you are into Bourbon and you're in the area you will be in heaven.

Great whiskey bar with LOTS of options! Came here twice, once when it was SUPER crowded on a weekend night and another time when it just opened for the night. Felt very different both times. When it's crowded, you can barely move around and you don't feel like you want to "enjoy" a drink of whiskey, but rather a drink to drink. However, when the place is quieter without much people, very cozy place to enjoy whiskey. Like I said, lots of options with prices ranging about $10-20 per pour. I recommend doing the flight, which is 3 1 oz pours (costing half of the listed price of whatever whiskey you order) if you want to try the whiskey. The bartenders are very helpful and give very good suggestions. They also have a pool table, which is a good thing to do on the side. Overall, I'm a fan of this place!

Cool "shabby chic" watering hole with a serious whiskey selection and people who seem to take their drinking seriously... Definitely a place where one can "chill out" and get quietly absorbed in consuming a wide range of top-shelf or obscure whiskeys (and other spirits). Beer tap selection is limited, but very good (both Guinness and Speckled Hen on tap). If you're looking for food -- fuggetaboutit! (there are peanuts on the bar and a good taco joint next door). I strongly recommend this place, although I was there on a quiet night and read that it could really fill up, which IMO would seriously change the vibe from good to something else...

came here because i had some down time. a pretty chill bar with a crazy selection of whiskeys. Not yet a whiskey kind of guy though. they have some decent specials like $4 pbr all night and $4 beers until 8PM. they have a pool table and a flatscreen which is a plus in my book. this bar falls into the category of no frills in that they don't serve any food and is good solely for hanging out and drinking. they were blasting some killers songs, and seems like a nice place to hangout if you don't want a place that is too loud. so I think this might be my new fav no frills place. sorry magician.

I love whiskey, I love throwing peanut shells on the floor and I love Whiskey Ward. This is a do not miss for any whiskey lover. They have endless options and the bartenders are friendly & incredibly knowledgeable about them all. Very helpful with choosing if you are overwhelmed. Not only are the drink options great, the vibe is great. The crowd here is always really chill with many locals. There are plenty of cozy seating areas and pool in the back. Oh, and free peanuts. Prices are very reasonable as well. It's hard not to love this place!

This place is legit!!! Friendly staff, friendly customers, and a selection of spirits that exceeded my expectations. Mel was my bartender and she was the heat! She took awesome care of me and genuinely pressed me to visit again. Laid back atmosphere and not crazy loud or packed with hipster douchebags. A great place to meet people and drink some top shelf spirits. Love the place!!!

4.4/5.0 would recommend to a knowledgeable whiskey person, if you are wanting to learn about the subject than I would recommend going in early before the bartenders get to wasted to cohesively string together a sentence. Over all great experience.

THE SPOT to go too! Such good drinks! Made it in time for Happy Hour, $5 Margs do the trick! Great bartenders and very spacious bar!

Now this is my kinda bar. I mean-- not completely. I'm not inclined to the whole dive bar appeal but I'm a bit of a whiskey fiend and this place has more bottles of whiskey than most bars have of bottles in general. The board in the back can get confusing because of the vast selection but they have a handy dandy whiskey bible to peruse. I was looking for an educational experience and letting the bartender know this, she was excited to oblige. Bourbons, American/Canadian ryes, peak/funk (what she calls it), there's so much to grasp and because of their flight system, it was a fun learning experience. I got to try all these rare drinks in one sitting. A flight of 3 rounds out to $20 or so. The lady I came with ordered the Sweet Tea. Definitely sweet and definitely strong... not so much tea-y. There's pool and darts in the back. Again, not my thing but I think I can come around to the idea of sipping and shooting.

This place sucks! The owner just kicked us out for a spilled drink. It was an accident and when we tried to explain he called security and had us removed. Don't go here.

The whiskey/whisky list is among the best in the city and fairly priced (for the city). Nice, helpful bartenders who will suggest cleansing your palate between drams. There are also offer flights and different sized pours. Not much in the way of good beer and the place does get packed with Bud Lite or Jack and Coke people so come at an off hour if you want to do the whiskey snob thing in a peaceful environment like me. Or come at peak hours and have fun in a chaotic environment, also like me, sometimes. They have free shelled peanuts to keep your fingers nimble.

Honestly nothing special about this place. They have a pool table for $2. It seems more like a dive bar than a whiskey hub. Came on a Wednesday night with some friends. Place was empty as hell. Maybe it's different on the weekend, I doubt it, it doesn't offer much.

My favorite place to hang on a Sunday night. While on the weekends it's super packed, Sunday has a chill vibe and the bartender, Jen, is the absolutely best (plus she plays great music). They have a great pool table and a happy hour on Sunday which is cool.

Go if you want to try an expensive and hard to find whisky. My best friend and I stopped in and had the Nikka Miyagikyo single malt which was fantastic! The crowd on a friday night was mostly professional types drinking over priced cocktails and beers - but to each their own. The whisky list is a small book so you can definitely nerd out and try something new. Would definitely go back.

Whiskey Ward is a great alternative to go to on the Lower East side when you are kind of sick of the same usual dive spots. Or I was at least sick of the same usual spots. It was my first time there but I walked by a sign with marked down beers and wells for $4 until 8pm. My friend and I had already been drinking next door at Boss Tweeds and went for a nitecap after I tried to no avail to get my sister to join us. She was residing in a hotel three blocks away eating bbq with her husband. Still not over it. Things to take note: Pool table in the back. Awesome creepy looking paintings of Victorian Vampires. Free peanuts are placed in bowls on the tables. Being in that neither of us had eaten dinner and I probably hadn't eaten that day, we went to town on the nuts. Their whiskey selection is much better than their beer selection. Also, this is the spot if you want some more expensive and exotic whiskeys poured for you on the cheap.

Been here a couple times and it's always a good time...the bartenders are cool..happy hour prices are always on point the drinks are good..I will always come here !

Dave is the man! The flights were great and I could drink lemon fizz for the rest of my life. You are missing out if you don't come here!! Check it out, highly recommended!

We had a great experience. The bartenders were amazing. Both of them really knew their stuff and generous with their time to answer questions. The variety available was beyond belief. We will definitely stop in again the next time we are in the city.