Dear Internet,

As of November 1, 2015 the Comedy in the Lou website will serve solely as a catch-all to redirect comedy curious folks in search of all things comedy in St. Louis. The social airwaves will go silent and all booking and promotional services will no longer be offered. In the past 5 years the scene in St. Louis has flourished and what was created to serve as a platform to collectively celebrate this growth can simply put, not keep up. So rather than do you the disservice of not being timely and relevant, we’re closing up shop and tipping our hat to the community that outgrew us. It’s all hugs and high fives ya’ll. Go see a show so that #STLComedy may live long and prosper.

Most Sincerly,

Kelsey McClure, Founder & Chief of Comedy in the Lou

#STLComedy Organizations

The Improv Shop

Website | Facebook | Twitter

Through locally raised, organic, group-oriented longform improvisation, we try to manufacture small families made up of people that were once strangers. Using the skills and techniques of Chicago-style improv, students in our program learn to succeed on stage while becoming better human beings off-stage.

We believe that improv training is a powerful and necessary tool for the working actor, a fun way to become a more confident public speaker, and an exciting means of self-expression.

STL Up Late

Website | Facebook | Twitter

Looking for an original live and local experience? STL Up Late is an interactive late night talk show featuring the most talented and engaging guests that St. Louis has to offer.

STL Up Late takes all of the best elements of your favorite televised late night talk shows, like live music and famous personalities, and adds interactive audience games, sketch comedy, video shorts and a spontaneity that you can’t find on FCC regulated TV shows. Anything can happen on STL Up Late, but you have to be there to see it because this is a live show only! Come an be a part of this uniquely St. Louis experience.

SketchPad

Website | Facebook | Twitter

Since July of 2014, STL SketchPAD purpose has been to provide an outlet for people interested in comedy writing and producing. We teamed up with STL Up Late to produce a high quality sketch comedy show that any local writer, no matter the level of experience, would have access to contribute to.

STL SketchPAD accept submissions for each show through email. Information can be found on stlsketchpad.com and by introducing yourself to the founder; Jason Flamm. We hope that fans of sketch comedy will find our show as a highly produced, well-written, and overall fun experience and we strive to deliver that each month no matter what level of comedy writing our contributors find themselves in.

Bare Knuckle Comedy

Website | Facebook | Twitter

Our flagship show, also called Bare Knuckle Comedy, is performed monthly at The Improv Shop in the Central West End of St. Louis. The show, which mixes stand up, sketch and video, has become “a stop for touring indie comics from across the country” (Alive Magazine). It takes place the second Saturday of every month at 8 PM.

This show has been in production since 2009 and we’ve hosted comics from across the United States. Past comics include Nikki Glase, Michael Palascak, Nick Vatterott and many, many more.

Bare Knuckle Comedy “kick started the alt comedy scene in St. Louis in 2009 (Riverfront Times), and has continued to be, as Marlena Rodriguez (staff writer for “The Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt) puts it, “the best comedy show in St. Louis.”

Sorry, Please Continue…

Website | Facebook

Started in the summer of 2014 by comedians Kenny Kinds, Jeremy Hellwig and Kris Wernowsky, Sorry, Please Continue… blends traditional storytelling with all of the quirks and weirdness of a late-night talk show. SPC combines the rich storytelling of The Moth Radio Hour with the comedy of Mystery Science Theater 3000. Monthly shows at Foam on Cherokee Street feature a variety of ordinary people telling fascinating, weird, wonderful, sad and strange stories of everyday life with the added commentary of a rotating panel of regular and guest comedians. In 2015, the show expanded to a second city as co-creator Kris Wernowsky began a regular monthly show at The Beachland Tavern in Cleveland’s historic Waterloo neighborhood.

Mound City Comedy

Website | Facebook | Twitter

Mound City Comedy produces comedy shows. Mostly good ones.

#STLComedy Shows:

Picnic Time

Contraceptive Comedy

Impolite Comedy

Wild Card Comedy Night

Loser. A Live Action Shame Show

Comedy at Foam

Two Girls. One Mic.

No Straight White Guys

#STLComedy Venues:

This is the all-inclusive list of coffee shops, rock clubs, comedy clubs and back rooms known to be a place for jokes.

The Funny Bone Westport | The Funny Bone Valley Park

Helium Comedy Club

Foam Coffee & Beer

The Demo

The Firebird

The Ready Room

The Duck Room

The Heavy Anchor

The Pageant

#STLComedy Supporters/Lovers

Indio Radio | The John and Kane Show

Rock Paper Podcast

New Scar Design