SARASOTA, Fla. — Raiders linebacker Aldon Smith has applied for reinstatement to the NFL, team general manager Reggie McKenzie told The Chronicle.

Smith’s one-year suspension for violating the league’s substance-abuse policy ends Nov. 17. Smith is out of rehab, league sources said, and McKenzie said that Smith is working hard to return to the team, pending a meeting with NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell.

“Aldon is doing well,” McKenzie said late Wednesday night. “That situation is going to be totally up to the league because he’s been in the program and they’ve monitored him. It’s up to Goodell to say, ‘Yea, nay or when.’ And he could say no to everything. … That part is out of our hands.

“The league will take everything into consideration and Aldon will have to meet with Goodell at some point.”

The Raiders aren’t allowed to directly communicate with Smith, per the suspension, but they have kept tabs on him through middlemen, such as Smith’s agent, Doug Hendrickson.

“Aldon is working out and getting ready,” McKenzie said. “He is in a great place and that’s the main thing. Whether Goodell lets him out or not, that’s the important thing — that he’s healthy and happy. But I would hope that we as a league reward a guy — with stipulations — who goes through the right steps and wants to get better and get his life in order.”

Smith, 27, entered a treatment center in July after a video shared on social media raised questions about whether he had violated the NFL’s drug and conduct policies again. Smith denied on Twitter that he was the man in the video who appeared to be smoking marijuana, and the league has investigated the matter, sources said.

Smith also had been to rehab in 2013, following two DUI arrests, and served a nine-game suspension in 2014.

Smith signed with the Raiders just before the start of the 2015 season after spending his first four years with the 49ers. He was let go by the 49ers in August 2015 after his fifth arrest, when he was charged with hit and run, DUI and vandalism.

Smith had 3.5 sacks and was stout against the run in nine games with the Raiders, teaming with Khalil Mack to give Oakland one of the best pass-rushing tandems in the league. The 2011 first-round pick had 44.5 sacks in 50 games with San Francisco.

The Raiders (5-2) certainly could use some help.

Oakland is tied for the AFC West lead, but has been dreadful on defense most of this season. After collecting 38 sacks in 2015 (tied for 14th in the league), it has nine this season (28th) and is on pace for 21.

Oakland is last in total defense (430.4 yards per game) and passing yards allowed (302.1), is 28th against the run (128.3 yards) and is 25th in points allowed (26.4).

Vic Tafur is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: vtafur@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @VicTafur