Came home today from running errands to find two boxes waiting on my porch and got supper excited. One from my parents, and one from my secret santa, known only as K.S. My normal excitement about a box from the parents was completely brushed aside as I couldn't wait to open my ss box! Inside I found a note and three presents. The note said my SS loves dogs, so I got excited for Jake(my little over 1 year old dog) to get a present too.

I'll start with the dog presents, well because I opened them first somehow. Jake got a nice big chew/treat bone and a tube of snausages. He's very excited, even as I opened the box he wanted to help. I gave him the bone right away and he went to work. As I'm writing this part, he is almost half done with the bone, guess he really likes it! He's never had snausages, but I'm sure he will love them.

Now for my present; some how in my randomly chosen order of opening presents I saved the best for last!! K.S. made me a 'hand-made 100% original duct tape wallet' (as the note inside the wallet explains), so cool!! the outside is a scene of me climbing a mountain, and the inside is full of all the pockets and slots I would need! I never bring my normal wallet on my outdoor adventures(hiking, snowboarding, rock climbing), usually just a few essentials(debit card, id, cash, etc) but they always just end up loose in my pack somewhere and never organized. Now I have a wallet that will be perfect for my outdoor adventures to carry the essentials! Rest assured K.S., this wallet is going places on many adventures and will be put the great use. It is such an awesome personal gift! But if that wasn't enough, no no, K.S. also put inside the wallet a $10 itunes gift card! not sure if this will be put to use on a movie, or album, or saved for app purchases, but I'm sure something good will come of it!

Thank you so much K.S., you did an awesome job. I'll forgive you for shipping one day late for having such a thoughtful and handmade gift and taking care of my dog too! Merry Christmas and thanks again!!

PS: in the time it took to write this and post the pics, Jake has reduced the bone to about the size of a satsuma orange, and by the time anyone reads this I'm sure it will be gone. He definitely enjoyed him self.