Feminist group that blocked reporter from interviewing students complains video did not have enough interviews

The sponsors of a feminist conference where staff prevented Campus Reform reporter Katherine Timpf from interviewing students for a video covering the event has released a statement decrying that the video did not contain more completed interviews.

“We regret that the clip shown online might overshadow some of the completed interviews that were conducted over the conference weekend,” the Feminist Majority Foundation said in an email to Fox News’ On the Record with Greta Van Susteren Thursday.

"You know what? That is so pathetic and so weak. What? Women are so delicate that they need extra information before answering questions about women?" - Greta Van Susteren

But Timpf told Van Susteren that there were not many more completed interviews to include — because the organizers prevented her from completing them.

“First they made an announcement saying they should beware of me, they were taking pictures of me and posting them on Twitter saying ‘watch out,’ and then actually interrupting my interviews and saying, ‘she’s a conservative,’” Timpf told Greta Van Susteren.

The footage of organizers repeatedly interfering with Timpf’s interview attempts was published Tuesday by Campus Reform.

WATCH: Katherine Timpf talks exclusionary feminists with Greta Van Susteren.

Van Susteren said she was “stunned by the Feminist Majority Foundation statement in response to organizers’ treatment of Katherine Timpf.”

“It reads in part, the statement, ‘...Some participants thought it would be wise if those sought to interview were informed about the perspective of Campus Reform.’ You know what? That is so pathetic and so weak. What? Women are so delicate that they need extra information before answering questions about women?” she said.

“Women promoting women’s rights should stand tall, they don’t need extra help, that is such the wrong message to send,” she added. “So, Feminist Majority, wake up, get out of 1968, this is 2014. A lot has happened, and there’s a lot of work to do.”

Van Susteren also compared the organizers’ treatment of Timpf at the conference to the movie Mean Girls.

“I’m a feminist, my career and background prove that one,” Van Susteren said.

Follow the author of this article on Twitter: @SterlingCBeard