After getting a taste of the Pixar life as Johnny ‘The Jaw’ Worthington in Monsters University, pop culture king Nathan Fillion wanted more.

“I’m a fan of animation and I’ve been a fan of Pixar from the beginning,” he says inside a downtown Toronto hotel room. “I’ve seen the Pixar documentary six times, I’ve seen every Pixar movie and I’ve been to their facility twice… I’m a fan”

So when Fillion got a chance to continue the love affair with an appearance in Pixar’s Cars 3, he jumped at the chance.

The Edmonton native, who has appeared on Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Joss Whedon’s short-lived Firefly and ABC’s Castle, plays the “businesscar” Sterling in the threequel.

“The fella that designed Sterling was an actual automotive designer – the Audi TT was one of his. It is a work of art. There are cars out there that are works of art. In the case of Sterling, his look says, ‘Nice, crisp suit.’ He’s handsome and he’s on point.”

Following the film’s world premiere, Fillion sat down with the Sun to gush about Pixar, talk about his hometown Oilers and tell us what it would take for a Firefly reboot.

What interested you in joining the Cars franchise?

I’m going to be incredibly honest with you. What drew me in was the fact that it’s Pixar. It’s not just pen on paper; it’s the future, it’s technology… And they do good, good stories and I just love that.

Cars is over a decade old, what’s the appeal of this franchise?

There’s something incredibly timeless about an automobile. There’s something amazing and romantic about a car and the things a car can do. Kids and cars are like kids and dinosaurs.

Cars 3 deals with an aging athlete chasing the glory days and learning when the time is right to pass the baton, but it also has a message for young girls, which is: Don’t be afraid to try something new. What connected with you most about the story?

Certainly there’s a theme of losing your place in the world. That does resonate with older audiences, it certainly did with me. But I think the one I love the most is the Cruz Ramirez (voiced by Cristela Alonzo) story – don’t let other people tell you what you can and can’t do. She was suffering from a lot of self-doubt and lack of confidence and the entire time, she just needed to believe in herself and that’s something I think kids can really take away.

Can we talk hockey for a moment?

Edmonton was a very exciting place to be this season. I really enjoy seeing the people I love, the city I’m from, in my homeland, so incredibly excited. I love the pride that we have in our hockey team. I love that stuff. It’s been a long time since we’ve been able to hold our heads high like that and I think next year’s going to be an exciting year.

So which Canadian team will be the next to win a Stanley Cup?

The Oilers of course.

You’re shooting Lemony Snicket’s A Series of Unfortunate Events in Vancouver. What’s your favourite thing about being back in Canada?

I like to be outside. It’s different in this country. It just seems greener; there’s more space. People might hear that and laugh, but if you go to New York City, you don’t get landscape there. You get skyscrapers and walls of concrete and glass and that can be claustrophobic. But when I come to Canada, I get outside and walk around and I recharge my Canadian batteries.

How often do you get asked about a Firefly reboot?

Constantly – which I love. I will never shake a stick at that. I think about William Shatner sometimes and I think about people saying to him, ‘Beam me up Scottie,’ or something and I wonder if I will ever tire of it. I don’t think I will. I think I will be sad when people stop asking about it.

So is there a chance it could come back?

You’re asking an actor about the chances of something being produced. That’s like asking someone who makes apple pies about apple orchards. It’s not my area, but here’s what I’ve learned. I never thought Firefly would be cancelled, obviously I was wrong. I never thought Firefly would ever see the light of day again, obviously I was wrong again. I never thought there would be a movie, I was wrong. I never thought it would last 15 years, so I am the last guy to ask because I’m so wrong about this stuff.

Firefly was cancelled after 11 episodes 15 years ago and yet it’s still popular. Why has it endured?

The same reason Pixar does so well. [Series creator] Joss Whedon cares the most about people, characters, stories and relationships. Yes, it’s a space-western, but people watched because it’s a group that didn’t really belong together who fight for each other and fight to stay together. It’s a sense of belonging people really like and a sense of safety that people really like. Those are the themes that really resonate.

Twitter: @markhdaniell

MDaniell@postmedia.com