https://plus.google.com/u/0/+AndyMedders

HTC really likes to market their devices alongside popular fashion events. After all, HTC is a lifestyle and not just a phone in your pocket. The HTC Rhyme was revealed during last year’s fashion week in New York and this year we get to see a limited edition HTC One X take on the runway.

Although we are not seeing a brand new phone this year, HTC has brainstormed with the fashion-centered folks from Cushnie et Ochs and MADE Fashion Week to design the perfect tech accessory to go with the Cushnie et Ochs 2013 spring clothing line. The clothing line goes on display later this week and details on how limited the Cushnie et Ochs/MADE Fashion Week inspired HTC One X is are just that, limited. The source says the black and white HTC One X will come with a MADE Fashion Week app and other associated software. You can also see in the featured image that a pair of black and white headphones will accompany the stylish smartphone. More details will likely follow once we figure out how to get a hold of one. Stay tuned to what is happening in New York, because in a couple of weeks, HTC has a big announcement to make.

Update: HTC just dropped us a line, letting us know that the HTC One by Cushnie et Ochs will not be available to the public. Limited numbers of the handset will be distributed to celebrities and a few others who will be attending New York Fashion Week.

[toggle_box title=”HTC One by Cushnie Et Ochs Press Release” width=”Width of toggle box”]

HTC NAMED OFFICIAL TECHNOLOGY PARTNER FOR MADE FASHION WEEK

HTC and MADE Fashion Week Come Together to

Celebrate the Collision of Fashion and Technology

NEW YORK, NY (August 30, 2012) – HTC, a global leader of mobile innovation and design, has been named the official technology partner for the 2013 Spring/Summer MADE Fashion Week taking place in New York City at Milk Studios September 6-12. HTC and MADE have come together for a ground-breaking partnership that celebrates the collision of fashion, technology and art through one-of-a-kind collaborations with a renowned artist and burgeoning designer.

“HTC’s generous support has helped us give over 40 designers the opportunity to show at New York Fashion Week,” said Mazdack Rassi, Co-Founder of MADE, Creative Director of Milk Studios. “They have been an extraordinary partner to MADE Fashion Week and we have the upmost respect for the innovative and creative work they do within their industry.”

As a kick-off to fashion week, HTC will co-host a star-studded, exclusive party at Milk Gallery on September 4th in honor of famed photographer Ben Watts’ Mix Tape exhibition. Watts, whose photography has been seen in fashion publications such as Elle, Vogue, Harper’s Bazaar, and Vanity Fair, has taken several photos using his HTC One device that are being featured in the exhibit. The photos will be on display along with a series of behind-the-scenes videos documenting Watts’ experience creating them. A part of the Mix Tape exhibition will feature a custom built EVOLVE / Ben Watts scooter housing four HTC One devices. Guests will be able to take their picture as they strike a pose on the scooter, and this will be on display at MADE for the duration of fashion week.

HTC has teamed up with Watts to develop the “Wattsup Photo” app – now everyone can create imagery “just like Ben”. Watts’ punchy color saturation and neon gaff tape borders make every photo look like a behind-the-scenes shot from a swimsuit magazine shoot. Users will also be able to use the app to collage their photos in Watts’ signature scrapbook-style.

“I teamed up with HTC because of their strong presence in pop culture, which I like to shower myself in and am a big follower of,” said Ben Watts. “Now tap that HTC ‘WattsUpPhoto” app and get your collage on shhhhh.”

In addition, HTC has announced their collaboration with the dynamic fashion design team and MADE Fashion Week participants Cushnie Et Ochs to create the HTC One by Cushnie Et Ochs. This limited edition, beautifully designed device references the simple color palette and bold

sensuality of the Cushnie Et Ochs Spring 2013 collection, which will be shown at MADE Fashion Week this September.

“Bringing the Cushnie Et Ochs aesthetic to a world outside the realm of fashion was so new and inspiring and really allowed us to develop the ultimate sleek and sexy tech accessory,” said Carly Cushnie and Michelle Ochs.

And guests visiting MADE Fashion Week will be able to stay powered by plugging into several HTC charging stations. These stations will be accessible throughout Milk Studios during MADE Fashion Week including backstage, and VIP lounge areas. During the busy week, HTC will be providing select attendees with a VIP Fashion Week Survival Kit featuring essential items for stylistas on-the-go including a nail file, lip balm, sewing kit, hand lotion, stain treatment stick, mirror and mints.

Tweet us at #HTCMADE.

[/toggle_box]

Source: WWD