Perez’s future in Formula 1 has been the subject of intense speculation over recent weeks, as the Mexican has weighed up with his backers what to do.

Although he signed a contract to remain at Force India months ago, the deal is also dependent on his Mexican backers concluding commercial arrangements with the team.

Perez has spoken to Williams and Renault about opportunities they could offer him for next year, but sources have suggested that in the end neither could give him what he wanted.

Williams’ form this season has been inconsistent, and Force India’ progress has left Perez’s current team locked in a tight fight with its rivals for fourth place in the constructors’ championship. Joining Williams would offer no guarantee of a big step forward.

And although the chance of a switch to the manufacturer-backed Renault team is attractive on paper, the French car company's desire to tie the Mexican down to a long-term commitment left him wary – especially with uncertainty as to how next year’s regulations will shake up the order.

Added to the situation is that there could be a prime vacancy at Ferrari in 2018, with Kimi Raikkonen’s current contract running out at the end of next year.

Perez has long harboured ambitions of driving for Ferrari, and a move to the Maranello team could be sweetened if he can take significant Mexican backing with him – with the Claro brand already on its roster of sponsors.

A one-year deal at Force India for 2017 would give Perez the flexibility to be in the frame for Ferrari the following year, or pick any outfit that looks to have made the most of next year’s new F1 regulations.

Perez has promised an announcement about his future plan before the Singapore GP, and he hinted at the weekend that his decision would ultimately be one he wanted all along – perhaps in reference to Ferrari in the future.

“It looks like what will happen is what I always wanted,” he said.

The Ferrari situation also points to speculation that Perez backer Carlos Slim is about to buy Force India being wide of the mark, as their ultimate ambitions in F1 lie with placing Perez at a prominent, title-contending team.