Acrobatics punctuated the final score, as Louisville City FC’s Luke Spencer celebrated his game-winning goal with a roundoff back handspring.

Orlando City B (0-2-0) couldn’t find a way to maneuver out of the deficit in its United Soccer League home opener Thursday night, losing 3-1 to Louisville (1-0-1) at Orlando City Stadium.

“Disappointed,” OCB head coach Anthony Pulis said. “We were, defensively, what I would call too much on the back foot tonight. Whether that was a little bit of fatigue, I don’t know, but it’s worrying a little bit at this stage in the season, probably a mindset thing.

“I don’t think you can defend the way we defended tonight and expect to win football matches. That’s something we’re obviously going to have to address. … So, on the whole a disappointing evening, but we have no time to sulk.”

OCB faces a quick turnaround, with home matches against Toronto on Tuesday and Charlotte four days later.

Pulis deployed a 4-4-2 formation, keeping in line with the club’s Major League Soccer team. Four MLS players started the match: goalkeeper Earl Edwards Jr., right back Kevin Alston, centerback Conor Donovan and midfielder Pierre Da Silva.

Nearly half the lineup changed from the season opener — a challenge OCB will continue to navigate as various MLS and academy players needing game time come and go — unlike Louisville, which is an independent USL club with a more static roster.

The lack of chemistry showed, and there was a timid style to OCB’s play, especially in the first half when players opted for conservative backward passes in most situations rather than pressing the attack.

The Louisville City FC at Orlando City B soccer game at Orlando City Stadium on Thursday, March 30, 2017. Louisville won the game 3-1. (Stephen M. Dowell) (Stephen M. Dowell)

Louisville took advantage of space between OCB’s midfielders and the back line in the 11th minute, when Cameron Lancaster whipped the ball from about three yards outside the box into the right side of the net to start the scoring.

Just before halftime, Tarek Morad’s errant header went into Louisville’s net for an own goal that evened the score, 1-1.

“We wanted to see them press more, that was the message at halftime,” Pulis said. “We needed to kind of get our back four up five yards, if you like. It was a little but better in the second half, but still not what we want. There were too many occasions where players were happy to play that safe, backward or square pass when really we want to be looking to be a bit more positive and play that forward pass if we can.”

Out of an announced crowd of 2,741, a home attendance record for OCB, about 100 people manned the 4,000-seat supporters section. They managed to fill the arena with the sounds of drums and chants.

Twelve minutes into the second half, Louisville’s Richard Ballard worked into Orlando City’s box and dumped the ball to George Davis IV, who finished for a 2-1 lead.

Spencer’s goal capped a three-pass sequence in the 76th minute.

“Very pleased,” said Louisville coach James O’Connor, who played for and coached Orlando City’s original USL team. “I thought we showed tremendous character at times, in the second half.”

OCB’s attack stepped up after that, mostly due to Da Silva’s service. He finished the night with seven of his team’s nine chances created.

Pulis was pleased the group improved on time of possession after their first match against the Tampa Bay Rowdies. OCB maintained nearly 51 percent possession Thursday against Louisville.

“We played better as a team, but unfortunately we lost,” Da Silva said. “We just have to put our heads up and work harder. It’s hard because every week we have a new team, new players coming in and out, so we have to get used to it, but it’s not an excuse.”

CAPTION Nani, the winger, was born in Cape Verde and represents the Portugal national team. He was officially introduced as Orlando City’s new designated player on Monday Nani, the winger, was born in Cape Verde and represents the Portugal national team. He was officially introduced as Orlando City’s new designated player on Monday CAPTION Nani, the winger, was born in Cape Verde and represents the Portugal national team. He was officially introduced as Orlando City’s new designated player on Monday Nani, the winger, was born in Cape Verde and represents the Portugal national team. He was officially introduced as Orlando City’s new designated player on Monday CAPTION Orlando Pride star and Brazilian legend Marta on Monday claimed her sixth FIFA Player of Year award after she was named The Best FIFA Women’s Player 2018 during Orlando Pride star and Brazilian legend Marta on Monday claimed her sixth FIFA Player of Year award after she was named The Best FIFA Women’s Player 2018 during CAPTION Orlando City goalkeeper Mason Stajduhar completed his final round of chemotherapy Tuesday Orlando City goalkeeper Mason Stajduhar completed his final round of chemotherapy Tuesday CAPTION After Orlando City's 1-2 loss to Atlanta United, fans threw trash onto the soccer field. After Orlando City's 1-2 loss to Atlanta United, fans threw trash onto the soccer field. CAPTION A high-tech business that makes crystal and silicon lenses for fighter jets and tanks was all shook up over construction of the Orlando City Stadium across the street — and now it’s suing the soccer team, the city and the general contractor. A high-tech business that makes crystal and silicon lenses for fighter jets and tanks was all shook up over construction of the Orlando City Stadium across the street — and now it’s suing the soccer team, the city and the general contractor.

ardelgallo@orlandosentinel.com