Casual observers sometimes treat the Black Lives Matter movement as just another series of semi-random, anti-cop protests that happen in cities from time to time.

In reality, the movement is the latest and most successful vehicle for a covert, wide-ranging, far-left, socialist agenda steered by revolutionary communists.

Yes, the Black Lives Matter movement is focused on racist police brutality and ending what they term as “mass incarceration.” This has been their trigger issue; the thing that gets people into the streets and into the movement.

The movement, however, is about The Movement—the collection of issues and affiliated groups that are the far left’s agenda.

As part of The Movement, Black Lives Matter deals with issues that may seem far afield from race and police brutality. For example, immigration “reform” — so two of the founders of Black Lives Matter are top-ranking officials with pro-illegal immigration groups.

The Movement is also anti-Israel, and as Breitbart News has reported, Black Lives Matter has alliances with a pro-Palestinian terrorist.

In fact, the Movement—and by extension, the Black Lives Matter group —has political positions on every single issue facing America, from taxes to social issues like abortion to foreign policy.

Yes, including “climate change.”

Don’t take my word for it, though—here’s how Black Lives Matter ties into what the left calls “environmental justice.”

Another activist on the Mall, Dominque Hazzard, a member of the Black Youth Project 100, said, “The Black Lives Matter and the Climate and Justice movements are totally connected because, around the world, climate change is disproportionately impacting people of color and the working class. “The movement is about ending state sanctioned violence against black people,” Hazzard said.

Want more? Here’s influential leftist author and columnist Naomi Klein, writing a year ago in The Nation:

What does #BlackLivesMatter, and the unshakable moral principle that it represents, have to do with climate change? Everything. Because we can be quite sure that if wealthy white Americans had been the ones left without food and water for days in a giant sports stadium after Hurricane Katrina, even George W. Bush would have gotten serious about climate change.

Don’t worry if that formula of “Climate Change = Racism” doesn’t make sense to you. It just means you aren’t a leftist.

Klein continues, tying in everything to the leftist worldview:

In the face of systemic state violence, courageous demonstrators shouting “I Can’t Breathe” and “Black Lives Matter” are asserting a positive, core principle about the value of every single human being, starting with the lives that are currently most discounted. Supporting the urgent call for justice and a transformation of the criminal justice system is of paramount importance and should not be watered down by piling every issue under the sun on top of it. At the same time, the clarion call that Black Lives Matter deserves to transform how we approach a great many crises in our societies, from school systems that systematically fail African-American kids, to a healthcare system that too often discards black lives. It must also jolt us out of our climate inaction.

Don’t dismiss Black Lives Matter as merely an anti-cop group. The 2016 election is less than a year away and with every protest, demonstration, and student uprising, they are recruiting and training activists and new voters to back far-left Democrats in November.

Earlier this month in Chicago, at a prayer vigil for Laquan McDonald, the BLM activists ended the event by handing out voter registration cards.