

President-elect Donald Trump boarded his plane, without journalists, on his way to the White House to meet with President Obama. (CBS)

This post has been updated.

Like so many presidential election winners before him, Donald Trump on Thursday traveled to the White House to meet with his predecessor. But something about the trip was different.

Per the Associated Press:

Trump departed New York Thursday morning, breaking protocol by not bringing journalists in his motorcade or on his plane to document his historic visit to the White House.

Trump headed to DC without a traditional protective pool, which shouldn't be surprising as I wrote Monday: https://t.co/YTSphqm3cX pic.twitter.com/bZbR0a3Nj2 — Michael Calderone (@mlcalderone) November 10, 2016

To be clear, the Trump-Obama summit was covered. Reporters in the president's protective press pool, who follow him just about everywhere, were invited. And White House Correspondents Association president Jeff Mason emailed journalists in the Trump pool Wednesday night to say that they could join, too — even if the president-elect refused to bring them along.

“The White House has been in touch with the Trump team about this but apparently has not gotten a lot of communication back,” Mason wrote. “If Trump advisers are telling their poolers there will be no coverage, that is not correct. The transition pool is invited to cover the meeting at 11:30 in the Oval Office with the White House pool.”

That's nice for now, but beginning Jan. 20, when Trump is sworn in, the real estate mogul will wield full control over media access.

After meeting with Obama and lunching with House Speaker Paul Ryan, Trump ditched the media again. This was the transition pool report from Politico's Edward-Isaac Dovere shortly after 6 p.m.:

[Trump spokeswoman] Hope Hicks has not responded to any additional emails with questions about the president-elect's status, schedule or whereabouts since changing course and saying he was headed back to New York. If there is any other information that comes in, I will send it immediately, but otherwise I won't have any further pool reports today. Thanks to you all for bearing with my failed attempts to get more out of the transition today.

Trump has offered no assurances that he will be more accommodating than he was on the campaign trail, when he prevented reporters from traveling with him on the same plane. And his first trip to the White House as president-elect doesn't inspire much confidence.