HyperST Profile Joined February 2015 Canada 278 Posts Last Edited: 2015-06-17 05:34:00 June 17 2015 05:14 GMT #1 Translation Source: http://wangyou.pcgames.com.cn/523/5239561.html

http://lol.duowan.com/1506/298388920466.html







From the S4 World champion jungler to the emergency duty sub top laner, Dandy decided to play as the top laner for one split.



LPL fans should have already noticed that VG recently went through some roster changes. The team’s star jungler, Dandy, transitioned into the top lane role. World6, the new jungler, had some synergy issues playing with the team. After three weeks of LPL, VG’s 0-5-1 record placed them at the 9th spot – a poor result. Today, we interviewed VG’s team leader, YiL. He answered some questions about VG’s roster, and claimed that “Dandy’s transition is a last resort action. I believe there won’t be any more changes for the rest of the split.







Q: VG has a poor result this split. Have you guys predicted this to happen?



A: Due to some problems in the team, we were forced to make roster changes. We have already predicted consequences for sending a rookie onto the stage. But, since we had good scrim results, the two 1:1 score from last week was still unsatisfactory.



Q: So Dandy has already played as the top laner for three weeks. Why let him transition to the top lane?



A: Our top laner had health issues that prevented him to continue playing competitively. Therefore, we picked out a somewhat good jungler from our youth training squad, and we let Dandy transition into the top lane. (Why not find a sub top laner instead?) There weren’t any good top laners to choose from and we believed that this rookie jungler suited the current patch very well. Also, we respect the players’ personal opinions. Dandy wanted to challenge himself to play the top lane role.







Q: Does Dandy play top lane regularly? As a jungler, is Dandy suitable for this new position?



A: He plays top lane a lot in solo queue. And our previous coach Homme, originally a top laner, is confident at Dandy’s transition. Dandy himself also found the top lane role to be interesting.



Q: There is public dissent about Dandy’s top lane transition to the top laner since he is a world class jungler. Is Dandy’s transition permanent or will there be future plans from the team?



A: Yes, the transition for him is a last resort action. I believe there won’t be any more changes for the rest of the split.



Q: We noticed that Vasilii (SWXG) still hasn’t made an appearance this split. How did you guys choose between the new ADC and Vasilii?



A: Vasilii is still in the period of self-adjustment. I believe Vasilii will return to the competitive stage when he returns to his former self. The new ADC Endless is very young and can be easily molded to suit the future development of the team.



Q: The mid laner, Hetong, sometimes received criticisms. What do you think about his current situation and status?



A: Hetong is an excellent player. He needs time to adjust his mentality. I believe he can remain the main carry power for the team.







Q: After Dandy’s transition and the introduction of a new jungler, we discovered that VG has some synergy problems. How do you guys solve them?



A: Overall, our team needs some time to develop synergy. At the moment, our team still has a lot of growth potential. The difficulty lies in the lack of experience from our rookies that are not yet experienced. Although Hetong played an entire Spring Split, theoretically the three Chinese players on our team are all rookies. I believe this team will be scary the day they can play in competitive games with 100% of their ability demonstrated in scrims.



Q: Honestly, VG’s roster looks promising. What is the team’s goal this split and is it achievable?



A: Our goal is top 4 this split. Last split we were denied the top 4 LPL spot by iG, and we were denied the top 8 spot in Demacia cup by iG again. I think we should take our revenge for once.



Q: iG looks solid at the moment, but VG is still adjusting. When will your team recover to its optimal status?



A: We still need some time. We want to prove ourselves post season. There are no weak teams in the current LPL. For VG, every challenge is an opportunity. I think that this is our first challenge. Whether it is facing iG or qualifying for S5 worlds, every team has hope. VG is no different.



Post interview notes: Two weeks after Dandy’s top lane transition. VG’s score consisted of 0-2 loss to iG, 1-1 tie to WE, and 1-1 tie to King. Overall, this team still needs the top-jungle synergy to be better.



We learned through our interview that VG already confirmed a new roster – this is a good sign, since this LPL split is too competitive, and VG has shown some decent cards on the table. We will have to see if VG can catch-up in the mid-to-post season after an unfavourable start. From the S4 World champion jungler to the emergency duty sub top laner, Dandy decided to play as the top laner for one split.LPL fans should have already noticed that VG recently went through some roster changes. The team’s star jungler, Dandy, transitioned into the top lane role. World6, the new jungler, had some synergy issues playing with the team. After three weeks of LPL, VG’s 0-5-1 record placed them at the 9th spot – a poor result. Today, we interviewed VG’s team leader, YiL. He answered some questions about VG’s roster, and claimed that “Dandy’s transition is a last resort action. I believe there won’t be any more changes for the rest of the split.A: Due to some problems in the team, we were forced to make roster changes. We have already predicted consequences for sending a rookie onto the stage. But, since we had good scrim results, the two 1:1 score from last week was still unsatisfactory.A: Our top laner had health issues that prevented him to continue playing competitively. Therefore, we picked out a somewhat good jungler from our youth training squad, and we let Dandy transition into the top lane.There weren’t any good top laners to choose from and we believed that this rookie jungler suited the current patch very well. Also, we respect the players’ personal opinions. Dandy wanted to challenge himself to play the top lane role.A: He plays top lane a lot in solo queue. And our previous coach Homme, originally a top laner, is confident at Dandy’s transition. Dandy himself also found the top lane role to be interesting.A: Yes, the transition for him is a last resort action. I believe there won’t be any more changes for the rest of the split.A: Vasilii is still in the period of self-adjustment. I believe Vasilii will return to the competitive stage when he returns to his former self. The new ADC Endless is very young and can be easily molded to suit the future development of the team.A: Hetong is an excellent player. He needs time to adjust his mentality. I believe he can remain the main carry power for the team.A: Overall, our team needs some time to develop synergy. At the moment, our team still has a lot of growth potential. The difficulty lies in the lack of experience from our rookies that are not yet experienced. Although Hetong played an entire Spring Split, theoretically the three Chinese players on our team are all rookies. I believe this team will be scary the day they can play in competitive games with 100% of their ability demonstrated in scrims.A: Our goal is top 4 this split. Last split we were denied the top 4 LPL spot by iG, and we were denied the top 8 spot in Demacia cup by iG again. I think we should take our revenge for once.A: We still need some time. We want to prove ourselves post season. There are no weak teams in the current LPL. For VG, every challenge is an opportunity. I think that this is our first challenge. Whether it is facing iG or qualifying for S5 worlds, every team has hope. VG is no different.Two weeks after Dandy’s top lane transition. VG’s score consisted of 0-2 loss to iG, 1-1 tie to WE, and 1-1 tie to King. Overall, this team still needs the top-jungle synergy to be better.We learned through our interview that VG already confirmed a new roster – this is a good sign, since this LPL split is too competitive, and VG has shown some decent cards on the table. We will have to see if VG can catch-up in the mid-to-post season after an unfavourable start. Twitter: @HyperST | @Esportsheaven