Mo Salah and Edin Dzeko will remain at Roma beyond the end of season

Roma have sealed permanent deals for Chelsea midfielder Mo Salah and Manchester City striker Edin Dzeko after activating clauses in the loan agreements of both players.

The Serie A club confirmed in a financial statement, that they are required to publish as a publicly traded company, that they had firmed up moves for the Barclays Premier League pair as well as Genoa’s Iago Falque.

Roma’s statement read: ‘These players were first signed on a temporary basis, which has been transformed into definitive transfers after planned contractual conditions were met.’

Scroll down for video

Mohamed Salah has agreed a permanent deal with Roma where he is currently on loan from Chelsea

Roma have signed Manchester City striker Edin Dzeko on a permanent deal from Manchester City

It appears that Salah, who has made eight appearances for Roma so far this season, and Dzeko, with seven games under his belt, both hit appearance targets that triggered clauses in their deals.

The Egyptian winger’s buy-out figure was £16million, providing Chelsea with an impressive £5m profit on the player they bought from Basle 21 months ago.

Salah was widely disappointing at Stamford Bridge and infuriated manager Jose Mourinho enough to force the 23-year-old to train away from the first team this summer. He departs having made just 19 appearances, scoring two goals.

Dzeko, meanwhile, will cost Roma around £8m after 72 goals in 189 appearances for City and playing a key role in their two Premier League title-winning sides.

Salah’s permanent departure from Chelsea may not be the end of the trouble the Blues face from the flop winger though, with FIFA having already confirmed they will investigate Fiorentina’s move into the players move to Rome.

Striker Dzeko will cost Roma around £8million after 72 goals in 189 appearances for Manchester City

Salah was widely disappointing at Stamford Bridge and infuriated manager Jose Mourinho

La Viola believe their loanee from last season had effectively agreed to rejoin them this season before renegading on that decision to move to the Italian capital in what they claim is a breach of contract.