Lloyd Dyer's goal was his first for Burton since mid-August, when they beat Sheffield Wednesday 3-1

Burton Albion scored a goal in each half to deservedly win their first competitive meeting with Birmingham.

The visitors, managed by former Burton boss Gary Rowett, pinned the Brewers back in the opening exchanges.

But Jackson Irvine then tested Blues keeper Adam Legzdins before former Birmingham loan signing Lloyd Dyer put Burton ahead with a superb finish.

Jamie Ward volleyed the second, before skipper Michael Morrison headed Blues' best chance wide from a late corner.

Burton's second victory in nine league games lifts Nigel Clough's side six places to 13th in the Championship, while Birmingham remain fifth after only their third defeat of the season - but their second on successive Fridays.

The home side initially struggled to get out of their own half, creating their first clear chance when former Burton keeper Legzdins used his legs to deny Irvine after former Aston Villa trainee Ward flicked on.

Northern Ireland international Ward then provided the pass for 34-year-old Dyer to run onto, and he gave the Blues keeper no chance with the outside of his left foot.

Ward forced Legzdins to a smart near-post save after outsmarting Ryan Shotton, but benefitted from a marginal offside decision to drive home the second as Burton made it six games unbeaten in matches played on Friday evenings.

Burton's Tom Naylor was one of six players shown yellow cards during the game

Burton Albion boss Nigel Clough told BBC Radio Derby:

"Quite often this season we haven't got what we deserved but tonight we could have won by more than two. That is the next stage for us, to really get the results that our performances deserve.

"Psychologically, it is important for us to try and stay out of the bottom three if we can. It is going to be a battle to do that but nights like tonight undoubtedly help.

"Jamie Ward has made one and scored one. That is what we brought him in for - that little bit of quality. The balance between him and Chris O'Grady is important.

"Chris is working his socks off up there. He is such a great team player and appreciated by everyone in the dressing room."

Birmingham City manager Gary Rowett told BBC WM:

"We were very poor but Burton thoroughly deserved it. They showed a bit more energy and drive on a difficult evening for us.

"Derby and Sheffield Wednesday have found out the hard way here too. Nigel has got a good side, who play with real forward impetus and quality. They'll turn a lot of teams over here, playing like that.

"For the first 15 or 20 minutes, the game panned out how we wanted and we exploited the spaces. But then they got back into it, worked what we were doing and started to pin us back with their wing-backs.

"After that we didn't play with anywhere near enough quality. We're going to have to be a lot better than that against Aston Villa next week."