November 2, 1898: Johnny Campbell cheers on the University of Minnesota Golden Gopher football team. The Minnesota Gophers first started playing intercollegiate football in 1882. They did not have a head coach the first season. The sport was “the all-absorbing amusement,” according to the school paper, as early as 1878, but they only played other Minnesota students. Teams met on September 29, 1892 for an intercollegiate track meet. After the races, the two groups of athletes played a game of American football with Minnesota winning 4-0. The only other game the first season was a rematch which Minnesota lost.

Thomas Peebles came from Princeton to teach philosophy. He had played football for the Ivy League school and was given the job of head coach. His only year in that position held a 1-2 record. Peebles gave the game some crowd appeal by encouraging the fans to support the players. He got the crowd organized and rooting for the team. Johnny Campbell took the idea one step further. He led the crowd in chanting for their team on the field. His efforts have led to this date being noted as the birth of cheerleading.

Soon, Campbell had formed a “yell leaders” squad. Six men got the crowds cheering together for the Big Ten team. Jack Minds, head coach, ended with a season record of 4-5 (1-2 Big Ten). Campbell’s original cheer is still used today. By 1903 Gamma Sigma was founded as the first cheerleading fraternity. Cheerleading was an all male sport until 1923. By that time gymnastics, tumbling, and megaphones were being introduced. Today, about 97% of cheerleaders are female.

The National Council for Spirit Safety and Education now provides safety training for spirit coaches. Their certification program stresses educational development while maintaining safe practices. The National Cheer Safety Foundation seeks to “reduce injury, disability, and death due to cheerleading.” Cheerleaders do more than urge the crowds to yell and scream. They are gymnasts who perform complicated routines featuring a combination of tumbles, dance steps, and stunts. Because of injuries, some moves have been banned. It is one of the most dangerous sports today due to the building of human pyramids. In 2001, US cheerleaders made ≈ 25,000 trips to the ER for injuries sustained while engaged in the sport.

“Rah, Rah, Rah! Sku-u-mar, Hoo-Rah! Hoo-Rah! Varsity! Varsity! Varsity, Minn-e-So-Tah!” – Johnny Campbell “The refs have always been blind, it’s our job to make them deaf.” – Danielle (cheerleader) “Wimps lift Weights, Cheerleaders lift People.” – Stephanie (cheerleader) “I trade sweat for strength. I trade doubt for belief. I trade cheerleading for nothing!” – Kate (cheerleader)

This article first appeared at examiner.com in 2009. Editor’s update: The University of Minnesota was established in 1851 and is located in the Twin Cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul. The urban campus covers 2,730 acres. The school colors are maroon and gold and they are still known at the Golden Gophers with their mascot, Goldy Gopher, urging them on to victory. Their endowment for 2012 was $2.494 billion (system wide). University president is Eric W. Kaler with Karen Hanson as Provost. There are almost 52,000 students enrolled, more than half as undergrads. Their football teams have won 7 National Championships and 18 Big Ten Conference Championships. Beginning in 1887 and with a 63-0 win, the Golden Gophers have played against the University of Wisconsin, Madison every year except for 1906. The 117 game rivalry is the most played in the NCAA Division I-A league.

Also on this day: Mo Ri Xon– In 1965, Norman Morrison lit himself on fire in front of the Pentagon as a war protest.

North and South Dakota – In 1889, the two states were added to the Union.

Is That Your Final Answer? – In 1959, Charles Van Doren testified to Congress.