Christmas Traditions of Homesick Cuban

Day 1 in making a traditional Christmas pork (Cuban Lechon) marinating. I didn't make it for Christmas eve this year, as we are in a hotel while our truck is getting worked on. But I have fixed this on the truck in the past. It can be a little time consuming, but many home-cooked meals are, and they are so worth it. As soon as the truck is fixed and we're back in it instead of this hotel room, I'll fix it. Perhaps for New Year's Eve.

To make the marinade you need garlic, and lots of it. Depending on the size of the pork anywhere from 3 to 10 heads. Yes, Cuban's use lots of garlic! For a small pork loin, I use around 3-4 heads for the marinade.

Ingredients:

Unsalted Pork loin, keep the fat on

3-4 heads of garlic, separated, peeled, and slightly crushed

2 cups of Sour Orange Juice (sour oranges are a tropical fruit about the size of a grapefruit, with a flavor similar to Key Limes.) If you can't find sour oranges or their juice, you can make your own by mixing 1 cup of regular orange juice, 1/2 cup of lemon juice, and a 1/2 cup of lime juice.

Salt and Pepper to taste Crushed Oregano, a couple tablespoons

Start with an unsalted pork loin, make sure it has a good bit of fat still on it. Using a sharp knife poke holes all over the pork loin, then stuff each hole with a mashed clove of garlic. This will take atleast one whole head, and up to several heads of garlic if you have a large pork. Rub the pork down with black pepper and crushed oregano.

In a blender add in the remaining 3 or more heads of garlic, peeled, and all of the sour orange juice. Blend until it is the consistancy of a thin pancake batter. With the pork in a deep-sided pan, pour the orange and garlic marinade over it. Cover with foil, wrap in a large plastic bag (an unused trash bag works well.) Place in the frigerator for at least 24 hours. The larger the pork the longer it needs to marinate. For large porks we will let it soak for 3 full days. Flip the pork a couple times a day.