34% city teenagers experience psychotic symptoms, finds study

Posted on 05-31-2017 Posted in Mental Health - 0 Comments

Be it for better amenities or good job opportunities, everyone wants to live in a city. While the facilities are many, city life can result in mental health disorders in people. According to a new study, growing up in a city may remarkably increase the risk of psychotic experiences such as hearing voices and paranoia.

The study, published in the journal Schizophrenia Bulletin on May 22, 2017, investigated the role played by neighborhood social conditions, personal crime victimization and urbanity in psychotic experiences among adolescents. The researchers at King’s College London and Duke University in North Carolina interviewed more than 2,000 British twins 18 years old regarding psychotic experiences they have had since they turned 12.

According to the research, among those living in the most densely populated cities, 34 percent of the participants reported psychotic experiences. The researchers also noted that 18-year-olds raised in big cities were 67 percent more likely to have such experiences. The findings revealed that up to 1 in 3 adolescents in the general population experienced psychotic symptoms, including hallucinations and delusions. The researchers also found that even after eliminating a range of potential risk factors, including family psychiatric history and adolescent substance problems, the link between adolescent psychotic experiences and growing up in an urban environment remained consistent.

In addition, personal victimization resulting from violent crimes was found to be twice as common among adolescents and those who had experienced such victimization were over three times more likely to experience psychotic episodes. The researchers also found that the combined effect of personal victimization and adverse social conditions was greater on teenagers than the independent effects of each.

The authors observed that the study results are quite important since early psychotic experiences are associated with a greater risk of psychiatric disorders and other related problems in adulthood. As early interventions offered the best hope for improving adult psychopathology, it was deemed necessary to understand various factors influencing psychotic experiences among young people to design effective preventive interventions, the researchers said.

Prior studies

The recent study is not the first one to link city living to psychosis. In a 2005 research, it was discovered that the higher prevalence of psychosis in cities was one of the most consistent findings in schizophrenia research. Similarly, a 2016 study suggested that the genetic variants that increased the risk of schizophrenia were found more common in cities rather than rural areas.

One of the factors that increased the rate of schizophrenia in cities was related to the immigrant population. According to Dr. Jeffrey Lieberman of Columbia University, people who migrate to cities face problems in speaking the local language or understanding the customs that often put them under stress, which may result in schizophrenia in an individual vulnerable to it.

Psychotic disorders: Severe but treatable

Psychotic disorders, including schizophrenia, affect the mind making it hard for someone to think clearly, communicate effectively and behave appropriately. Those with severe symptoms have trouble staying in touch with reality and are often unable to perform daily activities. Although the exact cause of psychotic disorders is not known, some of the factors that may play a role in their development include inheritance, drug abuse, stress and other major life changes. However, most psychotic disorders can be treated with a combination of medications and psychotherapy or counseling.

A leading behavioral health care provider in the U.S., Sovereign Health offers world-class treatment for a variety of psychotic disorders, including schizophrenia. At Sovereign Health of Florida, we view all mental health disorders as brain-based problems and incorporate various aspects of brain wellness to improve a patient’s cognitive faculties and brain functioning.

By providing our patients a comprehensive treatment through evidence-based techniques, we help them manage their stress, deal with underlying problems and prevent relapse of symptoms. For those looking for a psychotic disorder treatment, please reach out to a representative at Sovereign Health of Florida by calling our 24/7 helpline number. You can also chat online with our counselors to know about psychosis treatment offered at our state-of-the-art facility.