CLOSE Crime Stoppers of Central Indiana allows Indianapolis residents to share anonymous tips with law enforcement. Here are a few things Crime Stoppers wants you to know before you call. Wochit

Buy Photo Police tape a crime scene. (Photo: Michael Anthony Adams/IndyStar 2016 file photo)Buy Photo

KOKOMO, Ind. – Nine Kokomo police officers have been released from the hospital after being exposed to chemicals while serving a warrant at a home Tuesday night, reports Fox59.

According to Kokomo police, the officers were executing the warrant in the 1800 block of North Wabash Street in connection with a drug case. The officers were exposed to an “unknown chemical agent" as soon as they entered the home. The officers were having trouble breathing and said their eyes were burning.

Eight officers were taken by ambulance to St. Vincent Hospital Kokomo. An additional officer was treated at the hospital for exposure. All are expected to make a full recovery, officials said.

Neighbors described a chaotic scene and said some officers had difficulty walking under their own power.

“We actually saw one officer, who I assume was undercover because he was in plain clothes, we actually saw him carried out on the shoulder of another man with an oxygen mask on. He was carried out to an ambulance and put in the back of the ambulance and was gone,” said neighbor Sara Holloway.

“That’s when it kind of hit us... something very bad, chemically, unfortunately, something that is hazardous to the children and the neighborhood is here "

Two adult suspects inside the home were also exposed to the unknown chemical agent and were taken to Community Howard Hospital.

Six adults and a juvenile were arrested as a result of the incident.

Several emergency agencies were called to the area, including Howard County Emergency Management, the Kokomo Fire Department and the KFD hazmat team. The Indiana State Police Clandestine Lab Team will help process the scene.

This story originally published at www.fox59.com.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/2yrwXed