I know it’s been a long time since I’ve last posted anything. I don’t know why.. My problem have always been that I get into stuff really fast and then get bored really fast. So I end up with a lot of things that I do at the same time and then it just gets too much and I stop. But I’m back with some favourites that I’ve been making all the time and one of them is PIZZA!

Another funny side story is that I never even liked pizza before but now.. now I LOVE IT! We make this recipe at least every month and I always try to change out my toppings but it always comes down to the dough. I think this is the best dough I’ve ever tried, ever!

I got the recipe from one of my favourite Swedish blogs Nillas kitchen. Go to her blog here.

For this recipe you will need:

15 g of fresh yeast ( I’ve never worked with dry yeast before but perhaps it works in this recipe, but I would not know )

400 g of finger warm water (37 C )

1 table spoon of olive oil

1 egg

1 teaspoon of salt

60 g of corn flour

60 g of rice flour

100 g of buckwheat flour

50 g of potato flour

15 g of psyllium husk

How to:

The first thing your will need to do is preheat your oven too 250 C or 392 degrees Fahrenheit. I always add a tin upside down in the oven and use is as a pizza stone!

Start by adding your fresh yeast to a big bowl. Pour 400 g of water in a saucepan and heat it up to 37 (finger warm). Do not heat the water any further or the yeast will die. After that you pour a bit of your water of the yeast to dissolve it. Then add the rest of the water in. Whisk in an egg and add the oil. Do not whish too much. That will create too much air bubbles in the dough.



Add all your dry ingredients too another bowl. I use a scale to measure everything out. After you have mixed all your dry ingredients together. Add them too the wet mixture. I use a hand mixer with dough hooks. This makes it so much easier for me. Do not treat this dough as your regular dough. You have to treat it with love. You can’t take it out on the bench and slap it around. You need to combine everything so it has no lumps but do not overwork it. Around 5 minutes is more then enough with my handier. When mixed, let it rest for 45-50 minutes.

When the dough is rested the dough will have grown a lot. Take the dough out on a well-floured area and gently make it less sticky. Do not kned the dough. Gently gently add a little more flour if needed. Now get a parchment paper and grab some olive oil. Smear some oil over the parchment paper to make the dough not stick. You can now start rolling your pizza out on the parchment paper. I always roll it to a shape that I like and then I add my tomato sauce. When the sauce is added I always roll the edges up so there’s tomato sauce under the edges. Now just add your toppings and bake it 12-18 minutes. I always keep looking under the pizza as well because I want it crisp underneath.

Now just take out your pizza and VOLIA!

ENJOY!

Honestly is one of the best pizzas I ever eaten. On my pizza I added tomato sauce, mushrooms, basil, ham, prosciutto and vegan mozzarella. I do not eat any dairy but if you do please add cheese! When I take the pizza out I usually add more basil and prosciutto. Yum yum yum!

Advertisements