I’m sure many of you have heard of the recent crack down by the FDA on raw milk and those who provide it. It’s been all over.

So what is it exactly that has triggered our friendly government to go after these terrorists raw milk providers? Are they a menace to society? Are they a threat to our way of life or our very existence?

Hardly.

So why are the boys in blue burning through our tax dollars on something as completely innocuous as raw milk?

There are many who believe it is corporatism – “The control of a state or organization by large interest groups.” This coincides with the recent article on the destruction of the family farm.

Mike Adams, known as the “Health Ranger,” went on RT recently and discussed this a bit:

The anchor asks a great question: “Who decided that the government should decide who gets to put what food in their body?” An excellent question.

Ultimately, this comes down to the question of whether or not we are truly a free society. If we are truly a free people, able to freely enter into contracts with others, then why all the fuss?

If you’re selling raw milk, and I have a desire to buy raw milk, then why the heck is that illegal? And why is the government pouring it down the drain?

This is the very same government that is sitting on $15.7 trillion dollars of debt. The very same government that has stretched itself thin with wars in the middle east. Now they want to focus on milk. But I guess I shouldn’t be surprised, with the other crap they waste money on.

And really, it’s not even about the milk. It’s about control. Private contracts scare the hell out of big business, and even the government. That private citizens can agree amongst themselves on terms for exchange of goods or services is a threat to the “status quo” so to speak. It’s the same reason why the government is suspicious of you if you pay for too many things in cash.

Can you imagine how hard it is to collect tax revenue off private contracts or agreements? It’s amazing to me that websites such as Craigslist can even exist, where people can exchange goods or services privately (though I do find it interesting that you can sell sex on Craigslist, but not ammunition).

So what do you think? Am I making a big stink about nothing, or do I have a legitimate cause for concern here?

Nick Sorrentino notes on AgainstCronyCapitalism.org:

What’s next federal regulation of the selling of used cars? I could see this.

Nobody likes a micro manager. Especially one that has enough trouble managing its own affairs.

Give me your thoughts in the comments below, I’d love to hear what you think.