Workers of the world are about to take their revenge. Owners of capital will have to make do with a shrinking slice of the cake. The powerful social forces that have flooded the global economy with abundant labour for the last four decades years are reversing suddenly, spelling the end of the deflationary super-cycle.

[np_storybar title=”Six reasons the world should be paying more attention to Canada” link=”https://business.financialpost.com/news/economy/six-reasons-the-world-should-be-paying-more-attention-to-canada”%5D



North of the world’s largest economy sits Canada, a wealthy, peaceful, nation that is often overlooked in discussions of the global economy and financial markets.

It’s a country that policymakers and investors ignore at their peril.

Contrary to popular belief, Canada is far more than its relationship with the U.S. In many ways, the nation runs counter to many global trends – what Canada enjoys in abundance, much of the world lacks.

Continue reading.

[/np_storybar]

“We are at a sharp inflexion point,” says Professor Charles Goodhart, a pillar of the London School of Economics and a former top official at the Bank of England.

As cheap labour dries up and savings fall, real interest rates will climb from sub-zero levels back to their historic norm of 2.75 per cent to 3 per cent.

The implications are ominous for long-term U.S. Treasuries, Gilts, or Bunds. The whole structure of the global bond market is based on false anthropology.

Prof Goodhart says the coming era of labour scarcity will shift the balance of power from employers to workers, pushing up wages. It will roll back the corrosive inequality that has built up within countries across the globe.

If he is right, events will soon discredit the sweeping neo-Marxist claims of Thomas Piketty, the French economist who vaulted to stardom last year with an unlikely best-seller: Capital in the Twenty-First Century.

He alleged that the return on capital outpaces the growth of the economy over time, leading ineluctably to greater concentrations of wealth in an unfettered market system. “Piketty was wrong,” said Prof Goodhart.

The twin effect of plummeting birth rates and longer life spans from 1970 onwards led to a demographic “sweet spot”, a one-off episode. Prof Goodhart and Manoj Pradhan argue in a paper for Morgan Stanley that this was made even sweeter by the Soviet collapse and China’s entree into the global trading system.

The working age cohort was 685 million in the developed world in 1990. China and Eastern Europe added a further 820 million. “It was the biggest “positive labour shock” the world has ever seen. It is what led to 25 years of wage stagnation,” he said.

We all know what happened. Multinationals seized on the world’s reserve army of cheap labour. Those American companies that did not relocate plant to China were able play off Chinese wages against U.S. workers, exploiting “labour arbitrage”. U.S. corporate profits after tax are now 10 per cent of GDP, twice their post-War average.

In Europe, Volkswagen threatened to shift production to Poland in 2004 unless German workers swallowed a wage freeze and longer hours. IG Metall bowed bitterly to the inevitable.

Cheap labour held down global costs and prices. China compounded the effect with a factory blitz — on subsidized credit — that pushed investment to a world-record 48 per cent of GDP, and flooded markets with cheap clothes, shoes, steel, ships, chemicals, mobiles, and solar panels.

Lulled by low inflation, central banks let rip with loose money, leading to even lower real interest rates and to asset bubbles. The rich got richer. This era is now history. Wages in China are no longer cheap after rising 16 per cent on average for a decade.

The yuan is overvalued. It has appreciated 22 per cent in trade-weighted terms since mid-2012. Panasonic is switching production of microwaves from China back to Japan.

But the underlying causes of the deflationary era run deeper. The world fertility rate has declined to 2.43 births per woman from 4.85 in 1970, with a collapse over 20 years in East Asia.

The latest estimates are: India (2.5), France (2.1), US (2.0) and UK (1.9), Brazil (1.8), Russia and Canada (1.6), China (1.55), Spain (1.5) Germany, Italy, and Japan (1.4), Poland (1.3), and Korea (1.25). As a rule of thumb, it takes 2.1 to keep the population on an even keel.

The working-age numbers rose sharply relative to the numbers of children and — for a while — the elderly. The world dependency ratio dropped from 0.75 in 1970 to 0.5 last year. This was the sweet spot.

“We are on the cusp of a complete reversal. Labour will be in increasingly short supply. Companies have been making pots of money but life isn’t going to be so cosy for them any more,” said Prof Goodhart.

The dependency ratio has already bottomed out in the rich countries. It is now rising far more quickly than it fell as baby boomers retire and people live much longer.

China will face a double hit, thanks to the legacy effects of the one-child policy. “They kept it going 15 years too long,” said Prof Goodhart. China’s workforce is already shrinking by 3 million a year.

It is often assumed that the demographic crunch will pull the world deeper into deflation, chiefly because that is what has happened to Japan — by coincidence —since it pioneered mass dotage 20 years ago.

The Goodhart paper makes the opposite case. Healthcare and ageing costs will drive fiscal expansion, while scarce labour will set off a bidding war for workers. “We are going back to an inflationary world,” he said.

China will no longer flood the world with excess savings. The elderly will have to draw down on their reserves. Companies will have to invest again in labour-saving technology, putting their stash of money to work.

We will see a reversal of the forces that have pushed the world savings rate to a record 25 per cent of GDP.

The Bank of England’s chief economist, Andrew Haldane, warned last week that we may be stuck in a zero-interest trap for as far as the eye can see, with little left to fight the next downturn — typically requiring three to five percentage points of rate cuts to right the ship. His answer is a menu of quantitative easing so exotic it trumps Corbynomics for heterodoxy.

Goodhart makes large assumptions. He doubts that robots will displace workers fast enough to offset the labour shortage, or that greying nations are culturally able to absorb enough immigrants to plug the jobs gap, or that India and Africa have the infrastructure to repeat the “China effect.”

The world has never faced an ageing epidemic before so we are in uncharted waters. What is clear is that the near vertical take-off of the dependency ratio is about to shatter our economic assumptions.

The last time Europe’s serfs suddenly found themselves in huge demand was after the Black Death in the mid-14th century. They say it ended feudalism.