Caitlin Lyon and Michelle Novosel. (Courtesy photo)

Caitlin Lyon and Michelle Novosel want their small business, Pizzelle's Confections, to be more than just a chocolate shop.

They want to be the chocolate destination in Alabama -- or the Southeast.

"We love being at Lowe Mill, and we've been in Huntsville for 30 years now," Lyon said. "We don't see ourselves going anywhere. Michelle and I love what we do, and we plan to remain owner/operators for the foreseeable future."

The sisters are in the process of expanding their facility next door into the former Big Glass Art space at Lowe Mill ARTS & Entertainment on Seminole Drive. They will add more than 1,300 square feet, a move that allows Pizzelle's to increase its product line and workforce.

Pizzelle's, which launched at Lowe Mill in 2013, will add sweets and other bakery items at its expanded dessert cafe. They have also hired a pastry chef to help develop new recipes and manage that side of the kitchen.

"Our new desserts won't be traditional Southern desserts," Lyon said. "We have several recipes already that are based on some of our truffle flavor profiles."

Lyon said expanding into a dessert cafe was always their long-term vision, but wasn't part of the plan for 2016. When the Big Glass Art space came available, they couldn't pass it up.

So they changed their plans.

"If there is one thing we've learned in our 3 and 1/2 years of business so far, it's to remain flexible," said Lyon, who was recently named Creative Entrepreneur of the Year by the Women's Business Center of North Alabama. "Plans are great, but you never know what opportunities will come your way."

The expansion involves taking out part of Pizzelle's existing wall to make the dining area one large space. They also will add a bakery kitchen so the current kitchen can focus on chocolate production only.

Lyon said the kitchens will be mostly separated, but will remain open to the dining area so customers can see what's going on behind-the-scenes and interact with Pizzelle's employees during their visit.

Other work includes installing a new floor, changing out windows, adding plumbing and electrical infrastructure, and other changes to increase chocolate production and storage. Lyon said they hope to be open by late 2016, but that could change.

"We honestly don't know yet," she said. "It will just depend on how quickly and smoothly construction goes."

Pizzelle's Confections is inspired by fictional chocolatier Willy Wonka, the eccentric and beloved character created by Roald Dahl in the 1964 novel "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory." The business is named after the pizzelle, a traditional Italian waffle cookie and a favorite of the sisters growing up in Pennsylvania.

In 2012, Novosel and Lyon got serious about their love of chocolate and submitted an application to rent space at Lowe Mill. Their idea was approved after being subjected to a jury process.

Sarah Cole, media director at Lowe Mill, said it has been an honor having Pizzelle's at the independent art facility.

"Not only will this expansion allow our patrons to enjoy and explore local eats while visiting the Mill, but it will also further promote the idea of artistry in the culinary field," she said. "Pizzelle's brings innovation to their craft, and we can't wait to see what new, exciting, mouthwatering goodness they'll bring with this expansion."