Remember when Paul Ryan first introduced his plan to end Medicare and screw most of America, and even Newt Gingrich—Newt Gingrich, ladies and gentlemen—called it "right-wing social engineering"?

The Republican Party didn't take too kindly to that. First, he was forced to apologize to Paul Ryan. But that wasn't enough:



Then he said that quoting his words is a "falsehood." Then he said he wasn't even talking about Ryan's plan—just, you know, taking a strong stand against the principle of right-wing social engineering generally.

Then he started soliciting money from his supporters (yeah, all both of 'em) to promote Ryan's right-wing social engineering:



"The only way our country can win the future is by engaging our fellow citizens in serious discussions about major reform--not by avoiding hard choices," the e-mail reads. "Congressman Ryan has made a key contribution to entitlement reform, courageously starting the conversation about how to save and improve Medicare. And that's exactly the kind of national conversation I want our campaign to be about!"

Yesterday, on Face the Nation, Newt Gingrich once again bent over backward to pretend he didn't hate Paul Ryan's plan to end Medicare:



The one thing I objected to back in May of 2011 was that he eliminated Medicare for everybody. He came back with Ron Wyden—he listened, and one of the things I give Paul Ryan a lot of credit for is he really listens. And he came back with an improved Medicare plan [...] He met my only objection.

I'll just bet Paul Ryan really listened to what Newt had to say—especially when Newt had to go on his apology tour to pretend he never said what he said, and golly, he sure is sorry for having said that thing he never said.

But now, Newt thinks Paul Ryan's plan is the best plan evah!



I think the basic thrust of the plan, which is very parallel to what Romney's proposed, is the right direction. [...] Somebody has to have the guts to stand up and offer a roadmap, if you will, and I think that the effort that Ryan has put in makes him, in my mind, makes him an extraordinarily exciting choice because you now have a national leader who is capable of talking in detail with the American people about some very complicated topics, and that's a very unusual moment in history.

That's right. The Paul Ryan plan for American is the Romney plan for America. The only difference is that up until now, despite Romney being the nominee, there was no "national leader capable" of talking about it. Which is not a very nice thing to say about Mitt Romney, is it?

Hmmm. Maybe Newt's going to need to go on another apology tour.

