Tomorrow (Wednesday) some in the House of Representatives in the US will be voting on a bill called SOPA, short for Stop Online Piracy Act. If you don't know about it, you need to, whether you live in the US or not.

I wrote a long addendum to go with today's STW comic. If you need more information about SOPA, please read it and then educate yourself some more. And then everyone should contact their representative today - and if you don't live in the US, contact your friends in the US to contact their representatives.

SOPA is not the answer for any creator working with the internet who is concerned about work being shared with no connection to the original source. And it really needs to be stopped before it becomes law.

-Dante Shepherd

My friend, and fellow chart-enthusiast, Dante Shepherd sent me this chart today.

I have to be honest, I am discouraged. I think SOPA is a horrific piece of legislation and I don't think anything can be done. Ignoring the voice of the people has become a policy point of pride. Big "entertainment" business is behind the bill and their dollars hold more weight than our phone calls. This will pass, NDAA will pass, blah blah, stereotypical-Young-Voter-hyperbole-overly-idealistic-not-pragmatic-no-perspective sentiment. However you, dear reader, may wish to marginalize it, I am willing to fulfill the obligations of my age and political inclinations. I am worried, exhausted and angry. I feel unrepresented and without recourse.

When I get bogged down like this, I often turn to David Foster Wallace's article for Rolling Stone, "Up Simba!" about the McCain 2000 presidential campaign, if only to be reminded that none of this is new, the players just change. One can easily insert Obama 2008 in the role of McCain 2000. Young Voters were always always thus. Power is a deceptively simple motivator.

Unfortunately, while much is repetitive, the severity of the situation has changed from when this article was written. The examples DFW uses to voice concern over McCain's policies are Martin Luther King's birthday, gun control and logging. These are a far cry from corporate censorship of the Internet, assault on nonviolent student protestors and indefinite detention of American citizens. Well at least corporate influence in politics is an issue both then and now, so I guess that's...consistent.

I find that much of life is a fight against cynicism, despair and ultimately apathy. However, that sentence can be read in two ways. That struggle is either the unfortunate burden of life or its fundamental nature, which removed would also remove the incentive to live. I'm not at all sure which read is more optimistic or which is more bleak.

Anyway, here is DFW:

...we’ve been lied to and lied to, and it hurts to be lied to. It’s ultimately just about that complicated: it hurts. We learn this at like age four—it’s grownups’ first explanation to us of why it’s bad to lie ('How would you like it if . . . ?'). And we keep learning for years, from hard experience, that getting lied to sucks: it diminishes you, denies you respect for yourself, for the liar, for the world. Especially if the lies are chronic, systemic, if experience seems to teach that everything you’re supposed to believe in’s really just a game based on lies. Young Voters have been taught well and thoroughly. You may not personally remember Vietnam or Watergate, but it’s a good bet you remember 'No new taxes' and 'Out of the loop' and 'No direct knowledge of any impropriety at this time' and 'Did not inhale' and 'Did not have sex with that Ms. Lewinsky' and etc. etc. It’s painful to have to believe that the would-be 'public servants' you’re forced to choose between are all phonies whose only real concern is their own care and feeding and who will lie so outrageously and with such a straight face that you know they have to believe you’re an idiot. So who wouldn’t yawn and turn away, trade apathy and cynicism for the hurt of getting treated with contempt? And who wouldn’t fall all over themselves for a top politician who actually seemed to talk to you like you were a person, an intelligent adult worthy of respect? A politician who all of a sudden out of nowhere comes on TV as this total longshot candidate and says that Washington is paralyzed, that everybody there’s been bought off, and that the only way to really 'return government to the people' the way all the other candidates claim they want to do is to outlaw huge, unreported political contributions from corporations and lobbies and PACs . . . all of which are obvious truths that everybody knows but no recent politician anywhere’s had the stones to say. Who wouldn’t cheer, hearing stuff like this [...] who among us is so cynical that he doesn’t have some good old corny American hope way down deep in his heart, lying dormant like a spinster’s ardor, not dead but just waiting for the Right Guy to give it to?

And again:

...even though our elected representatives are always wringing their hands and making concerned sounds about low voter-turnouts, nothing substantive ever gets done to make politics less ugly or depressing or to actually induce more people to vote: our elected representatives are incumbents, and low turnouts favor incumbents for the same reason soft money does. [...] If you are demographically a Young Voter, it is again worth a moment of your valuable time to consider the implications of the techs’ last couple points. If you are bored and disgusted by politics and don’t bother to vote, you are in effect voting for the entrenched Establishments of the two major parties, who rest assured are not dumb and are keenly aware that it is in their interests to keep you disgusted and bored and cynical and to give you every possible psychological reason to stay at home doing one-hitters and watching MTV Spring Break on Primary Day. By all means stay home if you want, but don’t bullshit yourself that you’re not voting. In reality, there is no such thing as not voting : you either vote by voting, or you vote by staying home and tacitly doubling the value of some Diehard’s vote.

The lesson, of course, is keep up the good fight. And look out for the spirits of others. So, can anybody cheer me up? I fear I'm all tapped out.