ABC director of television Kim Dalton has questioned the government's prioritising the film industry ahead of the TV industry.

He has also questioned whether subscription television productions should receive government funding.

Dalton, presenting a keynote speech at a gala dinner celebrating the 30th year of the Screen Producers Association of Australia, also noted "a growing sense of urgency around the need for a national debate on the future of our broadcast sector" ahead of the federal government's proposed convergent media review.

Read Next

Dalton's most provocative statement was his suggestion Foxtel and Austar's Australian productions should not be eligible for government funding given their audience is only 30 per cent of the population.

He queried Screen Australia's process of "contestability" in choosing which projects to fund and argued "if changes in Screen Australia's approach result in lower licence fees and more publicly funded content shown behind a pay-wall then we need to squarely consider what this will mean in terms of a cultural return."

His comments came at the same conference in which ABC managing director Mark Scott revealed the ABC's success in aligning its aims with those of the government. "You've got to couch the arguments in terms of what we are in a unique position to deliver that is in the interests of the government of the day," he said.

The The Sydney Morning Herald, in an editorial, asked: "What does such self-interested alignment do to the ABC's independence?" and prompted ABC chairman Maurice Newman to defend Scott.

Dalton suggested subscription TV should not receive funding for programs when that money's "cultural return" would be far greater if given to the public broadcaster.

He added the ABC-Screen Australia agreement for its History Initiative should be continued.

"In the interests of reaching all Australians, of maximising audiences and of delivering certainty to producers, the ABC should be funded directly to curate a continuing slate of history programs," Dalton said.

His comments are the latest in the ABC's growing campaign to corral government funding, citing its broad reach as crucial in delivering more bang for its buck.

But Media understands the play to shut out Foxtel from funding has not been viewed favourably by Screen Australia.

Dalton also reiterated the call for the TV sector to receive a 40 per cent producer offset, up from 20 per cent, as in the film industry. He said television delivered far more effective returns than film.

Setting the agenda for Australia's $150BN agribusiness sector The program for Australia's premier agribusiness conference - The Global Food Forum - is set. Hear from more than 30 industry leaders including PepsiCo's CEO, Danny Celoni, Jayne Hrdlicka, CEO of A2 Milk Company, Barry Irvin, Executive Chairman, Bega Cheese and Costco's Managing Director, Patrick Noone. Sheraton Grand Sydney Hyde Park Book Now