You've probably seen them - you know, the people who walk or run around either completely barefoot or wearing specifically designed footwear (like the Vibram Five Fingers). It's hard not to stare at these individuals. They're doing something pretty crazy. But is it really that crazy or have we just gotten so far away from our roots (literally) that we can't recognize a great thing when we see it?



Barefoot running is a "new" craze (it's actually quite an old thing...probably the most ancient thing there is in fitness) and it stirs up a lot of questions among runners and non-runners alike. Is it safe to trapse around without protection? Is the adjustment period painful? Will it really keep injuries at bay? My answers: Yes. Yes. And yes.

I've been doing my own research with barefoot running and other than the strange looks I receive in my Vibram Five Fingers I'm happy to report that it truly is more of a friend than a foe, in my opinion; my experiences with barefoot running also align with others. The sport becomes safer as one adjusts to the new demands placed on the body. Although the adjustment period can stir up discomfort in the lower extremities, the usual pains (especially blisters) pass and one is left with - dare I say it - an injury-free body. In his book "Born to Run", Chris MacDougall proposes that barefoot running is the key to keeping injuries at bay--it is wearing heavily padded shoes that are the cause of so many running injuries and nagging aches and pains. I enjoy the feel of the ground I have when jogging the streets in my Vibram Five Fingers. My toes actually need to grip the ground to improve stability which which seems to have improved my foot and lower leg strength.

I'm still in the experimental phase (and not completely sold on the idea that I don't need to wear sneakers anymore) but the idea of running pain and injury-free sounds pretty fantastic, don't you think?

If you've experimented with barefoot running or haven't but would like to try and have some questions of your own, please feel free to comment below!