In a year of grim statistics in the drug overdose crisis, the City of Vancouver now averages seven overdose deaths per week, the city said in a news release.

Vancouver police recorded three suspected drug overdose deaths in the week ending Oct. 9, which is less than that average, but brings the overall toll to 275 deaths to that date in 2017 with more than two-and-a-half months left before the end of the year.

Related

Across the province, the B.C. Coroners Service reported Oct. 12 that 1,013 people had died from suspected drug overdoses up to the end of August, surpassing the 982 total for all of 2016 and eclipsing the 547 suspected overdose deaths over the same period of last year.

In Vancouver, the city highlighted some of its increased efforts to combat the ongoing opioid crisis, such as Megaphone Magazine’s “How to Save a Life: Frontline Stories” series.

Megaphone is one of the city groups to receive a grant from $600,000 set aside for community organizations to collaborate on overcoming the overdose epidemic.

In the news release, said Megaphone has held two neighbourhood events to date, one at the Mount Pleasant Neighbourhood House and one at the West End’s Gordon Neighbourhood House, to help counter the stigma towards addictions illicit drug use by telling the stories of drug users and peer overdose responders.

“Our team of storytellers and overdose responders are sharing perspective and training with people across the city,” said Megaphone executive director Jessica Hannon. “At each event they offer overdose prevention training, supplies and perspective to help ensure communities respond to addiction and overdose in their community with skill and compassion.”

Megaphone will hold additional events until Nov. 13, which it is advertising on special Facebook page for the initiative and registration is still open for the remaining dates.

More information on the trend of overdose deaths in B.C. can be found in the B.C. Coroners Service’s latest report, which covers 2007 to Aug. 2017.