High on a windswept Northumbrian moor, within raiding distance of the Scottish border, sits a lonely farmstead, appropriately named Coldtown. The main dwelling, a stone and slate early-Victorian farmhouse, has been Tony and Anne Pender’s family home for the past 16 years.

Despite the wicked winds that sweep down across the moors, Tony and Anne have barely heated it for the past five years, both because of the prohibitive cost of running an oil-fired Aga and because they are concerned about the quantities of fossil fuels they are burning. This spartan approach has worried their son, Richard, as Tony and Anne, now in their seventies, are beginning to be vulnerable to the cold. Sympathetic to his parents’ desire to stay in one of England’s last utterly wild places, Richard, a master’s student at Newcastle University, decided to help them build a new home close to the old farmhouse.

Although the site is within the boundary of the small settlement of farmhouse and two cottages, its wildly rural setting on the edge of the Northumberland National Park made planning difficult. This was further complicated by the rare neighbouring Grade II listed ancient Bastle – a fortified dwelling with upstairs living quarters and downstairs livestock area, where farmers could retreat when threatened by marauding rustlers.

With advice from local land agents Smiths Gore ( smithsgore.co.uk ) and architects Mawson Kerr ( mawsonkerr.co.uk ), the Penders took the unusual step of applying for permission under what is known in current planning guidance as Paragraph 55. This section of planning policy is a direct descendant of what architects call Gummer’s Law, which allows homes to be built in open countryside as long as they are “outstanding” in design. This exception was widely interpreted to favour grand country houses and was criticised for allowing the construction of vast neoclassical pastiches in the early days and, later, when in 2004 the Labour government amended the guidance in favour of innovative design, super-modern “spaceship” houses. The then planning minister Keith Hill, however, still followed the spirit of Gummer’s Law, stating that any homes built under the exception would be ones that “our future generations will be proud of” and that “people will want to visit in 100 years”.

The Penders’ home, which recently won permission, may well be one that future generations will be proud of – it is carbon negative and the majority of its materials are either renewable or reused – but it may not be receiving queues of visitors in 100 years, as does nearby Alnwick Castle. A modest three-bedroom, two-storey home, the former’s barnlike design means it blends in with, rather than stands out from, its surroundings. Its “outstanding” qualities, argues Jo Robison from Smiths Gore, are that the “environmental impact of the building will be exceptionally low and its innovative construction technique will be the first of its kind in Northumberland”.

This “Brettstapel” technique, used on the continent, employs deep timber planks from low-grade Sitka spruce growing in nearby Kielder, pinned with hardwood dowels that clamp together as the Sitka dries out. The thickness of the wood will give the house high thermal mass, contributing to its “Passivhaus” levels of energy efficiency and earning the house its name, Shawm – Northumbrian meaning “to warm oneself”. Like the neighbouring Bastle, the living quarters will be upstairs. Thus house design comes full circle, this time dictated by energy efficiency – cooler downstairs bedrooms and warmer upstairs living quarters – rather than the need to protect occupants from kilted raiders.

Another green and modest yet beautiful Paragraph 55 house, to be completed later this year, is architect David Liddicoat’s Thousand Trees House in Essex woodland (liddicoatgoldhill.com). “It’s such a modest size – just five bedrooms – that we were worried it wouldn’t get through,” says David. “What makes it exceptional is the way it sits within its landscape.” With timber construction and a curved sculpted roof, the house almost becomes part of the wood, like a walnut burr, rather than dominating the landscape the way previous Gummer’s Law homes did.

Both houses reflect a sea change in the way planners are interpreting guidance. Out goes enormous and brash and in comes modest and sustainable. These homes reflect the zeitgeist just as other beautiful country houses did in their time, from William Morris’s Arts and Crafts movement to “Capability” Brown’s harmonious marriage of architecture and landscape.

Rules for new buildings

Under Paragraph 55 the design of a new building should:

Be truly outstanding or innovative

Reflect the highest standards in architecture

Significantly enhance its immediate setting

Be sensitive to the defining characteristics of the local area

*Richard will be blogging about Shawm as the project proceeds, at projectsustainablehome.wordpress.com/

Send your questions to Sarah at Life, The Sunday Telegraph, 111 Buckingham Palace Road, London SW1W 0DT, asksarah@telegraph.co.uk