Get the biggest Newcastle United FC stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Georginio Wijnaldum admits he wants to play “with a beautiful club” in the Premier League but insists he has not “thought” about whether he will leave Newcastle United yet.

The Dutchman is attracting interest from a host of top flight suitors - Everton, Southampton and West Ham United have all been touted as potential destinations - following the Magpies’ relegation.

United boss Rafa Benitez is determined to keep hold of as many of his internationals as possible, but Wijnaldum has so far failed to commit his future to Newcastle.

Capped 29 times by the Netherlands, the attacking-midfielder may fear his place in Danny Blind’s international squad will come under threat if he plays in the Championship - though he has been included in the latest Dutch squad, and scored against Poland earlier this week.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Speaking to Dutch publication De Telegraaf, Wijnaldum said of his future: “The coach decides whether he takes me also to Oranje if I play a league lower - but to be honest, I haven’t thought about it.

“Of course I want to play at as high level as possible, in the Premier League, with a beautiful club – but not everything always goes the way you want.

“I will see what happens.”

The 25-year-old was Newcastle’s top scorer last season with 11 goals - all of which came at St James’ Park.

However, Wijnaldum suffered a 16-game barren spell without a goal between January and May.

Despite that, he still believes he was “one of the best midfielders in the Premier League” in 2015-16.

“The strange thing is that I have very nice statistics for a midfielder despite the relegation,” Wijnaldum added.

“I was one of the best midfielders in the Premier League – only the numbers were worthless.

“That is a shame.”