Getty Images

As the latest Working Title Films production, MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS, gets underway with filming in England and Scotland with Saoirse Ronan (Brooklyn) in the title role and Margot Robbie playing Elizabeth I, Guy Pearce and David Tennant have also been added to the cast.

The historic drama will be released by Focus Features, a long time partner of Working Title’s, who also released the first look at Ronan as the Scottish queen.

The film marks the feature film directorial debut of Josie Rourke, best known as the artistic director of London’s prestigious Donmar Warehouse theater. The film is based on John Guy’s biography, My Heart is My Own: The Life of Mary Queen of Scots, which was adapted by Beau Willimon (The Ides of March).

Jack Lowden, Joe Alwyn, Martin Compston and Brendan Coyle have previously been cast.

Celebrating 25 years in business, Working Title co-chairs Tim Bevan and Eric Fellner are producing the film along with Debra Hayward, reuniting the Oscar-nominated team for the Universal Pictures musical, Les Miserables.

According to Focus Features’ tagline, “Mary, Queen of Scots explores the turbulent life of the charismatic Mary Stuart. Queen of France at 16 and widowed at 18, Mary defies pressure to remarry. Instead, she returns to her native Scotland to reclaim her rightful throne. But Scotland and England fall under the rule of the compelling Elizabeth 1. Each young Queen beholds her “sister” in fear and fascination. Rivals in power and in love, and female regents in a masculine world, the two must decide how to play the game of marriage versus independence. Determined to rule as much more than a figurehead, Mary asserts her claim to the English throne, threatening Elizabeth’s sovereignty. Betrayal, rebellion, and conspiracies within each court imperil both thrones – and change the course of history.”

Other Working Title films that have recently wrapped include the upcoming Victoria & Abdul, reuniting director Stephen Frears with Judi Dench, and Joe Wright’s Darkest Hour, starring Gary Oldman as Winston Churchill. Both films will premiere at the Toronto Film Festival next month before being released by Focus Features.

Both Pearce and Tennant are with the Independent Talent Group, but Pearce is repped by CAA and Tenant by UTA.

Edward Douglas | East Coast Editor