Charli XCX has announced the launch of her own label, Vroom Vroom Recordings. Its first release will be the Vroom Vroom EP, out March 25 and streaming from Friday, which she's been working on with SOPHIE. (The title track previously aired during her Beats 1 broadcast.) Below, check out the EP art and listen to a sampler from the label, including "Vroom Vroom" and tracks by label signees RIVRS and CuckooLander, who'll both release singles on Friday. Update 12:30 p.m.: Listen to new track "Trophy" above.

Friday will also see the first installment of an ongoing Charli XCX radio show on Beats 1. Update (2/23, 12:57 p.m. EST:) The show has been named "The Candy Shop," according to the Beats 1 Twitter.

Two more of the Vroom Vroom EP's four tracks, including one with Hannah Diamond, will premiere ahead of the its release. She's also confirmed two shows at SXSW.

Describing the label's conception in a press release, Charli said:

Vroom Vroom Recordings is my new, experimental pop label and it will combine my love for bubblegum pop with mystery and darkness. The artists coming up through it will be sharp, potent, deadly, and ultimately, will leave their mark on pop music. RIVRS and CuckooLander are two artists who have so much intelligence, pop sensibility and potential - they know what they want and both have great vision. That inspires me and it's why I want to work with them. I've always been fascinated by shy and introverted people—something that I am mostly not—and I feel both acts are in different ways. It captivates me and sucks me in, and I think their music will do the same for others. I've worked with SOPHIE on the new EP and what we create together speaks for itself. Sometimes we get aggressive, sometimes we get beautiful; he pushes me and I push him. I'm making beautiful party songs right now and this is just the start. The album goes to other places and I can't wait for people to hear it. I feel the most creative I have in a long time and I couldn't be more excited for the next chapter.

Vroom Vroom:

01 Vroom Vroom

02 Paradise [ft. Hannah Diamond]

03 Trophy

04 Secret (Shh)

Read our interview with Charli XCX here. Revisit our Rising feature with Sophie.

Watch Charli XCX on Pitchfork.tv: