The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has left no stone unturned in expressing their discontent against the government over the soaring prices of onions in the capital, as it organised for the second time a unique protest by gifting onions to women who tie Rakhi to the Delhi BJP leader Sunil Yadav on the occasion of Raksha Bandhan.

The BJP leaders decided to give away two kilogram of onions to women in the JJ camps located near the official residences of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Congress vice president Rahul Gandhi.

According to reports, Delhi BJP leader Sunil Yadav said on Tuesday that he would distribute two kilogram onions each to the women who tie the Rakhi on his wrist and added that he would be visiting the JJ camp on Tughlak Lane, located behind the official residence of Rahul Gandhi and Race Course Road jhuggi camp near the PM residence at 11 am.

Earlier, the BJP on August 13 protested against the onion price hike by depositing onions and tomatoes in a bank, in an attempt to send out a strong message to the UPA Government on its apparent nonchalant attitude towards the plight of the people, especially the poor.

A BJP MLA from Kanpur Satish Mahana on Tuesday, deposited onions and tomatoes in the Allahabad Bank along with his party colleagues and said the government would have to take the blame if people start stealing onions and tomatoes instead of motorcycles and cars.

Onions have been touching an unbelievable retail rate of Rs.80 per kilogram in some parts of Delhi and in other parts of India, as most of the crop has been destroyed by the heavy monsoon showers.

According to television channel reports and other media reports, the price of onions has risen by over thirty two percent in the week gone by.

The average wholesale price of onions has more than doubled since the beginning of this month.

Union Minister of State for Agriculture and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Tariq Anwar said: "This is an issue of concern. It won't be wrong to say that middlemen are taking advantage of this.

He also said that he did not foresee a shortage of onions, as it is being imported from many states like Rajasthan.

Experts say the trend is unlikely to reverse any time soon and the earliest respite can be expected around the end of September.