Congress strongholds Rabareli and Amethi will now have power cuts like other districts of UP but 'VIP' tag on home turfs of SP biggies Mulayam and Azam Khan stays.

Sonia Gandhi (Left) and Rahul Gandhi.

Raebareli and Amethi- the parliamentary constituencies of Congress chief Sonia Gandhi and party vice-president Rahul Gandhi in Uttar Pradesh- will no more have 24x7 power supply.



The Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited (UPPCL) late Thursday withdrew the 'VIP' status given to the two districts in the state - a sign of the growing differences between Samajwadi Party (SP), the ruling party in UP, and the Congress at the centre.



The decision to provide round-the-clock electricity to the two Congress strongholds was taken nine months ago.



But soon after the privilege was taken away, power went off in the two districts for more than four hours, officials said.



Uninterrupted power supply, however, continues to other VIP zones such as Mainpuri (SP chief Mulayam Singh Yadav's parliamentary constituency), Kannauj (Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav's wife Dimple's parliamentary constituency), Etawah (home district of the Yadav family), Sambhal (constituency of Mulayam's nephew Dharmendra Singh Yadav) and Rampur (home turf of UP cabinet minister Mohammad Azam Khan).



The UP government, led by Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav, had run into rough weather when power regulatory authority sought a reply from it on the logic behind 24x7 power supply to nine districts, including Raebareli and Amethi, when other parts of the state was reeling under power crisis.



While officials preferred to keep mum on the matter, owing to its "sensitivities and political overtones", officials privy to the decision said from now on, power supply to these districts would be "normal" -- at par with others.



UPPCL officials justified the move, saying there was growing demand for power and stagnant supply.



"With the onset of summer, power demand is at its peak. We have to devise ways to accommodate every district," an official said.



But Congress spokesman Amarnath Agarwal said the move smacked of politics. He sought to know why some districts continued to get uninterrupted power supply, if power shortage was really the reason behind the move.