Melbourne's City of Darebin council decides to dump Australia Day ceremonies

Updated

Another Melbourne council has dumped its Australia Day celebrations after an emotional town hall meeting.

The City of Darebin council, which covers northern suburbs including Northcote, Preston and Reservoir, voted 6-2 for a series of controversial changes.

The council's Australia Day citizenship ceremony will be scrapped, and its Australia Day awards will be renamed the "Darebin Community Awards" and will not be presented on January 26.

The council also voted to acknowledge that January 26 marked the beginning of "British invasion" and was an inappropriate date for celebrations.

It will stop referring to "Australia Day" in all communications, and instead use the term "January 26".

Darebin's nine councillors include four Greens, three independents and two backed by Labor.

Last Friday, the council decided to bring forward the vote saying it was "in response to an emerging public debate regarding Australia Day and the #changethedate campaign which Darebin councillors have been actively engaged in".

It followed neighbouring Yarra council's decision to no longer refer to January 26 as Australia Day and hold an Indigenous-themed event instead of an annual citizenship ceremony on the day.

The contentious move resulted in the Federal Government stripping Yarra council of its powers to hold citizenship ceremonies and Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull describing the council's decision as an "attack on Australia Day" and a repudiation of Australian values.

Several Darebin residents have criticised what they described as a lack of community consultation.

David Schulz said it was not the council's business to be changing Australia Day celebrations.

"Australia Day is January 26 and it should remain that day. They're doing it without proper consultation and they're just making decisions for us," he said.

"I'm definitely worried about a domino effect. Once two councils do it, others will just follow their lead."

Preston resident Sue Chan praised the "progressive changes".

"We need greater information and education and there are a whole bunch of people who feel really threatened and I don't know why," she said.

"This is not debatable, this all happened. It's a fact. This is a really simple thing and it's about us coming together because the 26th of January is a bad day.

"Let's not have a party on it."

Change needed 'to respect our Indigenous people'

Councillor Trent McCarthy said the changes were necessary and rejected the charge that there had not been enough consultation.

"This has been discussed in the community for a long time," he said.

"[The] Australian people need to come to terms with the truths of this country to understand.

"We are at risk of losing our citizenship ceremonies but we need to make this change to respect our Indigenous people."

It is believed several other councils are now considering similar moves, including Hepburn Shire Council, which covers Daylesford, about 100 kilometres north-west of Melbourne, and Moreland council in the city's north.

According to the council, Darebin has the second-largest Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population in metropolitan Melbourne.

What Darebin voted to do: 1. Acknowledge that January 26 marks the beginning of the British invasion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander lands and oppression of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and is therefore not an appropriate date for an inclusive national celebration .

Acknowledge that January 26 marks the beginning of the British invasion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander lands and oppression of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, and is therefore . 2. Acknowledge the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people never ceded sovereignty of their land and have continuously cared for their country for over 60,000 years as the world's oldest living culture.

Acknowledge the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and have continuously cared for their country for over 60,000 years as the world's oldest living culture. 3. Acknowledge the first Day of Mourning was held on January 26, 1938 , being the 150th anniversary of the British invasion. The day was attended by Indigenous Australians and non-Indigenous supporters in protest of the national holiday and the "callous treatment" of Aboriginal people and continues to be held annually.

, being the 150th anniversary of the British invasion. The day was attended by Indigenous Australians and non-Indigenous supporters in protest of the national holiday and the "callous treatment" of Aboriginal people and continues to be held annually. 4. From 2018 onwards, host an inclusive and culturally-appropriate event on an agreed date in partnership with the Darebin Aboriginal Advisory Committee that recognises and celebrates the world's oldest living culture .

From 2018 onwards, in partnership with the Darebin Aboriginal Advisory Committee . 5. Support the #changethedate campaign and initiate an ongoing conversation, in partnership with the Darebin Aboriginal Advisory Committee, to build better understanding with the broader Darebin community of Australia's history and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community's pain in relation to the significance and history of January 26. This includes referring to January 26 merely as January 26 in all communications .

and initiate an ongoing conversation, in partnership with the Darebin Aboriginal Advisory Committee, to build better understanding with the broader Darebin community of Australia's history and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community's pain in relation to the significance and history of January 26. This includes . 6. Commit to engaging with Darebin's diverse community, including established and newly arrived communities, to raise community awareness and understanding.

Commit to engaging with Darebin's diverse community, including established and newly arrived communities, to and understanding. 7. Advocate to the Federal Government to change the date in line with the resolution passed by the National General Assembly of Local Government in June 2017.

with the resolution passed by the National General Assembly of Local Government in June 2017. 8. Seek opportunities to collaborate and partner with Yarra council and other relevant stakeholders to support each other's events, advocacy and education initiatives.

Seek opportunities to collaborate and and other relevant stakeholders to support each other's events, advocacy and education initiatives. 9. Continue to recognise excellence and service in Darebin, renewed as the Darebin Community Awards, and to be awarded on a day other than January 26 .

Continue to recognise excellence and service in Darebin, . 10. In collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders, introduce new categories within the awards that recognise and celebrate the achievements of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who live, work or study in Darebin.

In collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leaders, that recognise and celebrate the achievements of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who live, work or study in Darebin. 11. Reaffirm a commitment to holding citizenship ceremonies in a positive and timely way on dates as required that will not include January 26.

Topics: local-government, government-and-politics, community-and-multicultural-festivals, community-and-society, states-and-territories, federal---state-issues, northcote-3070, preston-3072, melbourne-3000, reservoir-3073

First posted