President Trump signed an executive order Saturday afternoon to institute a five-year ban on lobbying for former administration officials.

"So this is a five year lobbying ban, and this is all of the people — most of the people standing behind me will not be able to go to work," Trump said as he signed the order in the Oval Office. "It's a two year ban now and it's got full of loopholes and this is a five year ban. So you have one last chance to get out. Good, I had a feeling you were going to say that."

Trump, surrounded by press and administration officials, also signed two presidential memorandums to restructure the National Security Council and Homeland Security Council, and create a plan to defeat the Islamic State.

"We're going to be very successful," Trump said of the ISIS plan.

The text of the ISIS memorandum says that Defense Secretary Jim Mattis will submit a preliminary report to the president within 30 days.

The other memorandum declared that the director of national intelligence and chairman of the Joints Chiefs of Staff will no longer be automatic members of the Principal Committee, and will only attend PC meetings when their expertise is needed. The PC does include the chief strategist to the president, which in this case is Steve Bannon.

The lobbying ban and NSC/HSC restructure order are two pieces of a five-part ethics reform plan that Trump unveiled during the campaign. "Not only will we end our government corruption, but we will end the economic stagnation," he said in October.

His plan calls for "expand[ing] the definition of lobbyist so we close all the loopholes that former government officials use by labeling themselves consultants and advisors when we all know they are lobbyists," according to his website.

The plan also calls for Congress to impose a five-year ban on lobbying by former staffers and to ban fundraising by registered foreign lobbyists. Trump can't order that unilaterally. "I can tell your viewers that the president-elect is determined to move ethics reform in the next year in the Congress," Vice President Pence said after the election.