by Arrakis » 22 Dec 2017, 18:40

holly, jolly

the hollier and jollier the better!

least

Hey, Feudalists!First of all, we would like to wish you a Merry Christmas! We’ve prepared a fun contest for you:Create apostcard in-game using whatever you think shows off a Medieval holiday scene the most; from the beautiful, harsh environment, blood-soaked battlegrounds to the picturesque towns amidst the barren wastes and intimidating forests. What to use - screenshots from the game or real Medieval manuscripts? You decide.But remember:Send them our way via FB messenger or email: contest@lifeisfeudal.com (#) Winners will be announced on 2nd January 2018RecommendedLess than 1200x1200 px.PNG preferredYou can read the full rules of the contest here Yet do remember that Life is Feudal, after all - there may be no place for Christmas here...The Judgment Hour schedule is still in place for every Saturday (no JH on Epleland). There is a chance that we might reach out to some of you for help with testing the Instanced Battle mechanics.You can also expect another patch on Saturday morning/day European time. We plan to release a fix for client-side FPS degradation and a vassal-alignment fix that will allow guilds to fight and raid enemy vassals that are at war during JH, without the alignment loss that has occurred in the past.Oh, last but not, there are a number of users that have exploited the lack of Steam release and vulnerability of the current “Free ticket for LiF:YO on the Steam account” system. We want to warn such users that we are aware of their existence and are are giving them one week to relink their Steam accounts to their lifeisfeudal.com account and make sure that LiF:YO is purchased in their library. After the one week grace period, we will run a procedure to detect any remaining unverified accounts and will deduct the full price of the Ticket to Abella from their premium account. If there is no GF in the account, we have no choice but to take certain actions against these accounts.Don't worry too much though, since it's (kinda) Christmas and we're feeling ever-so-slightly less medieval than usual. Just be sure to relink your account before the week is up!Merry Christmas! … or not.— The team