Julie Kroll, of The Wrap, asks a fairly good question: “Why do they always blame the Jews?”

Have you noticed how celebrities who seem to reach a crisis moment in their lives lately bring up the Holocaust or engage in anti-Semitic wordplay during their outbursts — most notably Mel Gibson, John Galliano and Lars von Trier. Two were drunk, one is known for his unpredictable behavior, but still: Why blame the Jewish people?…

She goes on to give some examples of celebrities, and their relatives, making anti-Jewish comments or claiming to be Nazis. Some of them were drunk, some senile and some apparently taken out of context. But, for our purposes, we can assume that they were expressing their sincere opinions. After all, we know that many people really do dislike Jews. This much is not in question.

I knew, from the start, that Kroll would not even try to give an honest answer. Instead, this is what we get:

I read an article one of my good friends sent me from Aish.com. Historians and sociologists have come up with numerous theories to explain anti-Semitism. We will examine these one by one, and discuss the validity of each. Economic: Jews are hated because they possess too much wealth and power. Chosen People: Jews are hated because they arrogantly claim they are chosen by God. Scapegoat: Jews are a convenient group to single out for blame. Deicide: Jews are hated because they killed Jesus. Outsiders: Jews are hated because they are different than the rest of society. Racial Theory: Jews are hated because they are an inferior race. Let’s examine these six frequently given reasons…

After briefly examining only the first of these reasons, economic envy, Kroll apparently ran out of space and concluded, essentially, by saying “don’t be an anti-semite”. Not once does it even occur to her that there might be some sort of behavior, or attitude, common among Jews, behind the dislike called “anti-semitism”. It’s really very simple. If it is acceptable to announce that one likes Jews, or “people of color” or gays, then this must refer to certain traits. Otherwise, such a statement is meaningless. If a person can like certain traits, then it follows that he can also dislike those, or other, traits. I’ve never heard of anybody getting in trouble for saying he “likes Jews” or “likes gays” for example. But the implication would be that, relatively speaking, he dislikes gentiles or straight people. But this is not considered a problem. If that same person were to announce that he “likes gentiles” or “likes straight people”, there is little doubt that there would be vocal objections.

As of this writing, there are only 9 comments to Kroll’s article. That is to say, there are only 9 approved comments. Here is my comment, which I doubt will be approved:

Perhaps it’s because anti-white organizations and individuals, such as the SPLC, appear to be composed largely of Jews. Here is a short piece I wrote addressing this very issue: https://jewamongyou.wordpress.com/2011/03/13/a-disgusting-spectacle/ Here is a good synopsis how we know the SPLC is anti-white: http://unamusementpark.com/2011/08/the-splcs-crusade-against-white-rights-no-state-fair-there/