Mississippi Legal Ages Laws

Parents are always wondering if their children are growing up too fast. Meanwhile, their children would probably respond that they’re not growing up fast enough. While children and their parents are left to argue about when they’ll finally be grown-ups, how does the legal system in the Magnolia State distinguish between minors and adults? Here is a brief overview of legal age laws in Mississippi.

Age of Majority in Mississippi

State minor laws set out what is known as the "age of majority," or the age at which a citizen is considered an adult in the eyes of the law. Mississippi’s age of majority is older than most states, at 21 years old. However, minors do have some legal rights and responsibilities. For example, under Mississippi law, 18-year olds can enter into contracts and settle personal injury lawsuits.

Mississippi Age Statutes

Mississippi’s legal age statutes are listed in the table below.

Age of Majority 21 (Mississippi Code 1-3-27) Eligibility for Emancipation By petition, no minimum age specified (Mississippi Code 93-19-3) Contracts by Minors 18 for personal property; ratification must be signed in writing (Mississippi Code 15-3-11) Minors' Ability to Sue 18 to settle personal injury claims; married minor may file in marital matters; court appoints guardian ad litem (Mississippi Code 11-21-3) Minors' Consent to Medical Treatment Not specified

Emancipation and the Legal Responsibilities of Minors

Mississippi, along with many other states, has for a legal process by which a person under the age of 21 can apply to become an adult in the eyes of the law. The process is referred to as the “emancipation of a minor,” (or in Mississippi as the “Removal of Disability of Minority”) and can allow for a minor to become responsible for his or her own decisions regarding education, health care, residence, and other matters. Mississippi statutes do not provide a minimum age for emancipation, and courts will decide emancipation cases in the best interest of the minor. For the most part, until they turn 21 (or they are emancipated) minors will be treated as such in criminal cases, including age and status offenses.

Mississippi Legal Ages Laws: Related Resources

State laws regarding the age of majority may cover a variety of topics. You can consult with a Mississippi family law attorney if you would like legal assistance regarding a juvenile case or a family law matter. You can also find more resources and information on this topic by visiting FindLaw’s section on Family Law.

Learn More About Mississippi Legal Ages Laws by Speaking to a Lawyer

All states have age restrictions for certain activities and legal processes, such as purchasing cigarettes or getting a driver's license. Also, your age will determine whether you are charged for criminal acts as an adult or a juvenile. If you need help with an age-related legal matter, contact a family law attorney in Mississippi today.