Dear Bakers,

We still have a few people with unclaimed or pending rewards. Of course, we would like to ensure everyone get theirs. So far we have been solving the issues case by case but we needed for a more global announcement, thanks for your understanding.

It has been long wait for the game itself, it may have been long wait for the very few people with shipping issues (Sometime parcel returned to us up to 4 times! Dear Customs!). But we hope it was worth the wait.

Please take a look at the few cases below:

A. PHYSICAL REWARDS

Parcels are long shipped now, if you didn't receive anything, it means something got wrong. If you are awaiting for any physical reward and didn't receive it yet, please contact us @ WM's Magical Game Factory along with your baker nickname so we can figure a solution.

Please note: For any shipments that would be solved now, the actual shipping would only occur in September as shipping staff is in vacation (but the costumer support staff isn't aren't, so don't wait to contact us, it may take time to figure out the issue).

Please also read the "important notice" note at bottom of this announcement.

http://www.magicalgamefactory.com/en/faq/contact-support_5/

B. DIGITAL REWARDS

If you have pledged for any digital reward and didn't receive it yet, we had issued all the download keys more than a year ago by email. So please check your email twice and if nothing in your mailbox, contact us @ WM's Magical Game Factory along with your baker nickname for a solution.

Please also read the "important notice" note at bottom of this announcement.

http://www.magicalgamefactory.com/en/faq/contact-support_5/

C. VITA

As we moved office over a year ago, we temporary had to return the Vita development kit to Sony as required by contract. However at the time we asked it back, they would no longer provide Vita development kit to such our small companies. As we can't control whenever we will get another development kit and already made numerous attempt at it, we consider this version of the game cancelled (reward-wise, at least). We understand the disappointment but we hope you understand the situation which is not in our hands.

Only if you have swapped your reward for a sony VITA game, please contact us @ WM's Magical Game Factory along with your baker nickname so we can get you a solution.

Please also read the "important notice" note at bottom of this announcement.

http://www.magicalgamefactory.com/en/faq/contact-support_5/

D. ANDROID

Regarding Android version of the game, game should be released very shortly hopefully in September.

Only if you have swapped your reward for a Android version of the game, please contact the support @ WM's Magical Game Factory for further instructions. Please do NOT wait the release of the actual game on Android.

Please also read the "important notice" note at bottom of this announcement.

http://www.magicalgamefactory.com/en/faq/contact-support_5/

E. DVD

Regarding the DVD. As stated previously, we will group the making-of with our other games so it get a bit more interesting to watch. An email with instructions will be sent to you, when available. Thanks for your patience!

-----------------

IMPORTANT NOTICES:

- For any digital rewards that weren't claimed or activated (except DVD), we can't warranty support by the September 30th 2016 as we can't issue nor control any download codes past this date (nor the availability of the platform at all! SEGA wins!).

- For any physical rewards that weren't claimed (except DVD), we can't warranty support by December 30th 2016 as we can't keep forever the products in stock in good condition and most of those are limited items with absolutely no cheat on the quantities.

- Any physical reward received defective, please contact us asap because the actual warranty of the product ends by December 30th 2016, don't wait!

Thanks for your understanding and support!