Just make a great game for your intended audience, because you'll attract haters regardless



That's 島崎麻里 Mari Shimazaki, one of the most respected women in the games industry and artist behind the titular heroine Bayonetta, a series that has received rave reviews for its excellent gameplay and 'fight against the patriarchy' storyline that's been lauded by many as strongly feminist:

-B.I.T.C.H: Bayonetta in Total Control of Herself



-Slaying Your Way to Radical Empathy: Bayonetta and Feminism



-The Feminist Stance on Bayonetta



-Bayonetta, Two | by Leigh Alexander

-Bayonetta 2 Review: The Witch is Back by Maddy Myers

Mari Shimazaki's even been featured many times on her company's webpage Mari Shimazaki " PlatinumGames Inc., where the fans get to hear her own words on the characters she creates for the games they play.

Not only is the artist behind Bayonetta a woman, but the sequal, Bayonetta 2, is produced by a woman too, 黒田晶子 Akiko Kuroda:







Here's Kuroda's video on the controls behind her game

Another artist that worked on Bayonetta (Mai Ohkura) even dressed her baby as the heroine for a Halloween themed tweet:



Being a game by such high profile women you'd think it'd be a prime target for the 'drive women out of video games' crowd right? But look at who Shimazaki's biggest hater turns out to be:



Why, it's that person who got famous for the kickstarter about inclusiveness to women in video games! While Mari Shimazaki has given extensive interviews about her thoughts on designing Bayonetta, Sarkesian completely ignores Shimazaki's role and is actually dedicating her next video to why Shimazaki's character is the 'wrong' kind of woman in games.

While Bayonetta 2 received rave reviews, including multiple perfect scores, one high profile gave it a low score citing 'sexism'. When I looked up his background though, that reviewer actually had a personal beef with the company that created Bayonetta (Platinum) as well as a generally bigoted attitude towards non-American titles:

In addition to using the word 'Japanese' as a pejorative , this man also decides what games get reviewed on polygon.com

But feminism isn't a hive mind, Sarkeesian's attack on Bayonetta saw feminist games journalist like Leigh Alexander came out in support of Mari Shimazaki's work:





Feminist and video games journalist Maddy Myers also cracked a joke that Bayonetta was so strong she scared men:



No matter what game you make somebody will vocally hate you on the internet, be it anonymously through social media or up on high from established industry publications. Just this week, game industry veteran American McGee started receiving death threats because he dared to say ...Anita Sarkesian should be in a live debate against a journalist critical of her youtube videos? Seriously?









You can read more about it here if you'd like

But you know what? Even if you have the occasional hater, there will be those that support you too.

Do what you love and you'll gather those who love what what you do.