[Miami ranked outside top 25 after first week]

[10 questions for the 2016-17 Hurricanes]

[UM signs top-100 recruits Lykes, Gak]

[For second year in a row, Canes sell out tickets]

A few forces collaborated in Miami’s successful recruitment of top-20 wing Lonnie Walker, one of the most heralded recruits in program history.

Second-year assistant coach Adam Fisher, who like Walker hails from the suburbs northeast of Philadelphia, discovered him early, identified him as a must-get for Miami, and kept in daily contact. On Walker’s official visit last month, Hurricanes players made him feel at home. Liz Larranaga, Jim’s wife, bonded with Walker’s mother.

One of the unsung heroes: a group of UM boosters who let the team use their private jet. That allowed Miami to send four coaches to Reading, Pa. multiple times — without taxing their recruiting budget, or causing schedule conflicts during a hectic period where recruiting collides with the start of the season. Instead of one or two coaches showing up, Jim Larranaga and all three assistants — Fisher, Chris Caputo and Jamal Brunt — were a large and regular presence.

“We rolled four-deep,” Larranaga said by phone Wednesday, hours after Walker signed his letter of intent. “I think that made an impression on Lonnie and his family.”

Speaking of impressions: the Hurricanes turned heads nationally by signing a top-10 recruiting class last year for the first time, and they might do it again. After signing Walker, ESPN’s No. 19 overall player and the fourth-best shooting guard, Miami moved to No. 9 in 247Sports’ rankings, and No. 11 in Scout’s. Rivals rated UM’s class No. 17 before Walker’s commitment. ESPN had it No. 22.

Late Tuesday, Walker called the Hurricanes to say he chose them over Arizona, Kentucky, Syracuse and hometown Villanova, the defending national champions. Is there a measure of satisfaction in beating those blue-bloods for blue-chippers?

“All coaches are such competitors, and we all battle so hard in the recruiting arena to find the right guys for our programs,” Larranaga said. “He would have fit in anywhere. But I think he felt most comfortable with us, our players, coaches, the university. That’s what’s very satisfying, knowing we have a player who really did his research and felt like we were the right place for him.”

What type of player is Walker? Recruiting analysts tab him as an attacking wing, who uses his 6-foot-4, 205-pound frame to score in great numbers.

“The first thing I noticed about Lonnie was his speed in the open court,” Larranga said. “I kidded him one time on the phone, I was watching the Olympics and I was watching Usain Bolt win the 100-meter dash. I told him he reminds me of Usain Bolt when he gets in the open court. He doesn’t run — he glides. He can finish with a dunk in traffic because of his speed and acceleration and elevation. But he’s also a very good three-point shooter and he shoots a good percentage from three.

“To add a player of Lonnie’s caliber continues to elevate our program and our ability to compete with the best teams in the country. If you watched that Kansas-Duke game last night, they’ve got a lot of great players. We want to be able to compete with them and the first thing you have to do is compete in recruiting.”

On his official visit, Walker was quickly at ease with fellow Philly-area recruits Davon Reed and Ja’Quan Newton, fellow alumni of Team Final AAU. He got on board with 2016 five-star recruits Bruce Brown and Dewan Huell, who told him he could be a part of something special. He liked the potential Miami’s other signees, like top-100 recruits Chris Lykes and Deng Gak. His family — including an uncle that paid his own way, to satisfy NCAA rules — had coaches answer their questions about academics and basketball.

“It was a great team effort,” Larranaga said. “Sometimes things just click. That weekend went according to script. We wanted to make sure we touched every base. … There were so many things we had to show them to make sure it was a good fit for him.”

It appears Miami will have a balanced roster returning next year, with two elite-level recruiting classes backing up veterans like point guard Newton, junior forward Anthony Lawrence Jr. and center Ebuka Izundu. Even if the forces that afflict rosters across the country — transfers and early NBA draft declarations — surface at UM, the Hurricanes should be well-positioned.

“Very, very pleased with my coaching staff and the direction we’re going in,” Larranaga said. “But recruiting is like breathing. You’ve got to do it every day, and you’ve got to do it a lot.”