For Arsenal the incentive is clear enough. Victory over Anderlecht at the Emirates Stadium on Tuesday may be enough to secure a place in the knockout phase of the Champions League for a 15th year in succession, a remarkable achievement when one witnesses the relative toils of teams such as Manchester City in this competition, though Arsène Wenger is aware of a rather more nagging statistic.

His team currently trail Borussia Dortmund in Group D by three points and have finished second in their group in each of the past four seasons. Their reward has been elimination in the first knockout stage to heavyweights in Barcelona, Milan and, twice, Bayern Munich, all of which serves as a reminder that the Germans currently topping the section must be overhauled. “I don’t know exactly how it is in the other groups at the moment, but it is always better to finish first,” said Wenger. “In some way, you feel guilty if you don’t finish first. People certainly think: ‘OK, if you are punished [with the draw] then you deserve it because they finished second.’”

If Dortmund are to be overcome then Anderlecht must first be dismissed, preferably in a more emphatic manner than that achieved in Brussels a fortnight ago, when Kieran Gibbs and Lukas Podolski eclipsed Andy Najar’s opener only in the contest’s frantic finale. Arsenal were poor in Belgium, labouring to make an impression in the din whipped up by the locals and only really panicked into life late on.

They will feel more at home back in London and will hope their own attacking talents come to the fore: Alexis Sánchez was outstanding against Burnley on Saturday and will again operate behind Danny Welbeck, with Aaron Ramsey potentially drafted in to central midfield in the hope his attacking qualities add to the hosts’ threat.

Wenger’s intentions are clear, his desire stated to maintain momentum throughout the group stage where in previous seasons, most notably last year, late squad rotation and a drop off in results has condemned his team to the runners-up slot. “We were expected to be where we are so, at the moment, we have not achieved anything special,” said the Frenchman. “But, sometimes, just to do your job in your game is important. Let’s see if we can do that against Anderlecht.

“It is far from done already. They are a team who are certainly more dangerous away from home because they are good on the break. So let’s see.

“I think if we win this match we have a good chance to be qualified. I believe every win makes you strong and every defeat makes you weaker, so no matter what happens against Anderlecht, we will try to play until the end. In terms of [future] rotation, we will see. What is for sure is that, offensively, I have much more choice than in previous years because top players like [Joel] Campbell are not even in the squad for this game. I have more opportunities to be good going forward. At the back, at the moment, we cannot change too much.”

In acknowledging the lack of options across his back-line, and even with Laurent Koscielny expected to be fit again after the international break, it was somewhat surprising that the versatile Francis Coquelin was loaned to Charlton on Monday for a month. Wenger acknowledged there was “light at the end of the tunnel” in terms of his walking wounded, even if a virus has delayed Jack Wilshere’s return from a knee injury until Sunday’s trip to Swansea. Theo Walcott will most likely be offered another cameo from the bench though the England manager, Roy Hodgson, invited back to his former club Malmo as a guest of honour for their game against Atlético Madrid, will not be present to witness it.

Wenger has been encouraged by the recent upturn in results, that recovery in Brussels the first of three successive wins, even if performances have remained stodgy at times. At least there have been consecutive clean sheets to suggest a balance has been struck. A lack of options at the back – with Nacho Monreal still filling in at centre-half – has at least allowed the rearguard to become accustomed to each other’s foibles. Anderlecht, happiest themselves on the counterattack, must not be permitted a foothold in the contest.

“I’m an attacking manager instinctively, but when you need to score four goals to win the game it’s one hell of a mountain to climb,” added Wenger. “To attack with freedom you need to also think: ‘OK, I can go up field,’ and be sure you will be secure defensively. In the modern game, the physical levels have gone up – everyone is quicker – so you cannot guarantee you will score three or four goals in every game. I don’t think teams attack much better these days, but they defend much better than 10 years ago.”

A win, combined with Dortmund defeating Galatasaray, would secure progress. Then attention turns to topping the group.

Arsenal (4-2-3-1; probable): Sczcesny; Chambers, Mertesacker, Monreal, Gibbs; Ramsey, Arteta; Oxlade-Chamberlain, Sánchez, Cazorla; Welbeck.

Anderlecht (4-2-3-1; probable): Proto; Vanden Borre, Mbemba, Deschacht, Achaempong; Tielemans, Jljestan; Najar, Praet, Conte; Cyriac.

Referee C Turpin (France).