At eBay, we monitor our rates, and periodically make adjustments to them. The following updates will take effect on November 6, 2014:



Fee update for sellers without an eBay Stores subscription. The maximum standard final value fee—the maximum fee sellers without an eBay Stores subscription will pay per sold item—will be raised from $250 to $750. This change only affects items that sell for more than $2,500.

Note: The current $250 maximum final value fee for sellers with an eBay Stores subscription is not changing.





eBay will be making the following updates to the free automatic relist feature, currently available to some sellers:

Starting November 6, items relisted via the automatic relist feature available to some sellers will count towards your monthly allotment of free listings*. Once a seller’s allotment of free listings is used up—or if the relisted item does not qualify for a free listing—the standard insertion fee of 30¢ per listing will apply, as well as any optional feature fees.

Starting later this year, the automatic relist feature will no longer be available for 1- and 3-day duration listings.

The automatic relist feature currently relists an unsold item once. Starting November 6, if you are opted-in to this feature, your item will automatically be relisted up to two times.

Note: Sellers will be credited—either via their free listings allotment or on their invoice— for insertion fees for the automatic relisted items where the free automatic relist feature was selected prior to November 6. The manual relisting policy will still apply.

When listing an item, be sure that the automatic relist option is either checked or unchecked, depending on your preference. Note that before choosing this option, you may want to check the Selling section of My eBay for any personalized recommendations to improve your listings.









Considering the changes above—and the fact that eBay’s new global brand campaign will inspire buyers, now and through the high-volume holiday season—it’s a good time to review the benefits that come with an eBay Stores subscription . Starting as low as $15.95 a month, subscriptions offer:



More free listings*—up to 2,500 a month with an Anchor-level subscription



Final value fees as low as 4%, capped at $250 per item



Access to powerful promotional tools that can help you sell more



Your own dedicated eBay.com home page



Exclusive, subscriber-only promotions



As always, thank you for selling on eBay.* Pay no insertion fees for your allotted free listings per calendar month. Final value fees and optional fees, including advanced listing upgrades and supplemental service fees, still apply. Learn more