This is such a great gift for a guy – make a faux leather frame using paper bags and Mod Podge. It's such a sophisticated look for less!

So sometimes we get a little girly around here and the Man Podgers have to bring us back to reality with tutorials that are acceptable for dudes. I have four brothers, so I get it.

If you are a dude, or even if you need a more masculine touch to your decor, I think you will appreciate this project from Walter.

————–

Do you REALLY think you can make a decoupage frame look like faux leather? Yes, it can be done . . . with Mod Podge. Take a look for yourself and learn how I made this masculine decoupage picture frame.

I was inspired by a recent trip to Ralph Lauren; there were so many vintage leather props in the shop like mail carrier bags, belts and boots . . .

And thus a idea was born…”I can do that” with Mod Podge!

DIY Faux Leather Frame

Gather These Supplies

Brown rice papers and torn brown paper bags

Mod Podge Gloss

Round tip brush

Metal ruler

Superfine Japan Colors (Rose Pink)

Mineral spirits

Polycrylic

I used an old neglected flat frame. I first measured the width of the face of the frame – then I cut pieces of rice paper to fit the first layer of the frame.

For the second layer, you'll prepare strips of paper bag by tearing with a ruler:

Decoupage the rice paper onto the frame and let dry.

Crinkled the torn paper bag strips and then uncrinkle (not completely, but mostly). Use the round tip brush to apply the Mod Podge into the crevices and place on top of the decoupaged rice papered frame

***DO NOT SMOOTH OUT THE CRINKLES***

Press the paper right on top with your fingers and let dry.

When I studied Furniture Design in college, I used Superfine Japan Colors all the time. The quality and color(s) are very rich and elegant!

Take a plastic cup, fill it with a half a teaspoon of Rose Pink and a 1/4 cup of mineral spirits and stir until the paint is smooth and slightly watery. Use a sponge brush and apply over the decoupaged frame.

The results are out of this world! Some of the irregular patterns from the crinkling absorbed the paint in an inconsistent pattern (that's what you want; it gives more of a rich leather look!).

Superfine Japan Colors dry fast, though I would let it dry for at least a day before sealing with Polycrylic.

Look at the gorgeous and masculine rich texture this frame has! I inserted a image from the Graphics Fairy and hung the faux leather frame above my dressing table. I could see this type of frame in Ralph Lauren shops . . . that would be nice, don't you think?

Don't forget to visit me on Etsy, at my blog or on Twitter.