Greetings Rocksmith fans!

It’s been a while since a clue has taken this long to be solved (4h45mins), but it has been now – so let’s have a look at the clue and how it was solved:

The forum users went down a rabbit hole of looking at ciphers and various other methods used in the past to make the puzzle more difficult, but it was a hint from @UbiParadise that got things back on track

Interesting note: The person who was closest to being on the right track deleted their post. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Some /r/rocksmith users had also done a letter count and discovered that there are some letters completely missing – BEJQXZ.

A combination of these 2 things got people looking at anagrams – and getting not a lot of success until Jason stopped by again with another hint;

It didn’t take long for the puzzle solvers to notice the missing E’s and deduced the numbers referred to how many E’s to add to each line to get the anagrams to make sense.

Fast forward nearly 2 hours and we have biscobid with;

The text is from an interview Aaron Lewis did with The Michigan Daily, referring to the song “Outside.”

Que Jason for the confirmation and;

It’s a 3 pack from Springfield, MA’s @Staind!

Staind was heavily featured on Rock Band with four singles such as It’s Been Awhile, So Far Away, Not Again, and This Is It.

Staind are also well known for using some really low tunings – and it turns out they might have had something to do with the survey that @UbisoftStudioSF asked us to participate in early July.

Full quote of the linked post below:

Earlier this year we asked some questions via a survey to help shape the future of Rocksmith DLC. Once again, huge thanks to YOU and the entire Rocksmith community for sharing your thoughts with us. Our next release will be the first time results from the survey have been reflected in a DLC pack. Our upcoming Staind song pack features the most heavily downtuned tracks to be included in Rocksmith 2014 thus far. Thanks to your feedback, we’re offering more than just the true tunings for these songs. Here is a list of arrangements for each song in the pack: “Outside”

Bass: Db Standard

Lead (Main): Eb Drop Db

Lead (Alt.): Ab,Db,Ab,Db,Gb,Bb (True tuning)

Rhythm: Eb Standard Song #2

Bass: Eb Drop Db

Lead (Main): Eb Drop Db

Lead (Alt.): Ab,Db,Ab,Db,Gb,Bb (True tuning)

Rhythm (Main): Eb Standard

Rhythm (Alt.): Ab,Db,Ab,Db,Gb,Bb (True tuning) Song #3

Bass: Eb Standard

Lead (Main): Eb,Ab,Db,Eb,Ab,Eb

Lead (Alt.): Ab,Db,Ab,Db,Eb,Ab (True tuning)

Rhythm: Eb Standard

Rhythm (Alt.): Ab,Db,Ab,Db,Eb,Ab (True tuning) Each true tuning arrangement will allow you to play the songs in the Staind pack as the band originally intended. Additionally, you’ll have the option to learn each song without heavily downtuning your instrument to Ab. We’re offering the best of both worlds with this release. This approach is something we’re looking at doing more of in the future if the opportunity presents itself. We definitely want to hear your feedback on this and want to encourage you to share your thoughts with us here in this thread. Have any questions? Feel free to ask them here as well. Enjoy the brand new Staind song pack! Also, we have this information about “how” the retuning will work

For Bass: We had to use some tone switches to emulate the pitches played with a 5 string. For Outside: A few positions and fingerings were altered to be able to play the song in Eb Drop Db. For Song #2: We omitted the low Abs played in the song’s true tuning. For Song #3: This custom tuning (Eb,Ab,Db,Eb,Ab,Eb) had to be used on the main path because the main parts of the song wouldn’t be possible to play otherwise. The guitarist used a guitar in Eb Standard tuning to play octaves which wouldn’t work in this tuning. As such, they had to be moved to a different part of the neck to avoid many wide finger stretches.

So let’s have a look at the likely candidates, starting with the confirmed track,

The following is Speculation

Seems an obvious choice,

Maybe some Fade? Right here? Or are they all So far Away from the tracks you’d pick?

With tunings like these and a catalogue of 7 albums to pick from, what tracks are you hoping fill in those last two slots? How do you feel about the “don’t need an extra guitar tuning” vs the “actual tuning” alt arrangements? I for one am very interested to see how they play in game – if for no other reason than some of my favourite – low tuned – bands now have a better chance of making it to the game as well!

Let us know your thoughts in the comments below.