By Raoul Davis

One of the single hardest issues that entrepreneurs who invent a new product face is a lack of optics. Regardless of whether you have created the world's greatest widget or have even found a miraculous cure, if no one ever sees your innovation, it was all for naught.

Unfortunately, most (if not all) independent inventors aren't recognizable, which means they can't open doors to distribution or boardrooms where products are pitched.

As a result, too many ideas to die on the vine. Getting stuck in a developmental stage with no extended resources, no channels to pursue and no market reach is part of the reason only 1 in 5,000 inventions have a successful product launch.

So how can the nameless inventor successfully get through the right doors -- or at least be seen by the right people?

Build Your Audience

If you alone are unable to opens those doors or open the lines of communication, align yourself or your product with those who can. A company looking to procure new products or develop new ideas is less likely to lend an audience to a single, nameless inventor than to multiple, trustworthy people. They are more likely to take the path of least resistance that leads to many potential products at any given time.

This path-of-least-resistance mentality is the reason inventors have spent countless dollars and traveled great distances to do annual, semi-annual or industry specific trade shows for years. They hope that being in the same building as people they want to connect with will allow them to finally open those lines of communication. For some, this has proven quite successful. For others, it has only sealed their fate in a quicker fashion because these types of events are a hard and fast drain on what are normally scarce resources.

While there are many entrepreneurs who are still actively adopting this old-school approach to connecting, its cost-restrictive nature is leading others to online innovation portals and a strong social media presence. This is surely a sign of the times and a time and energy saver. Advantages of social media are obvious and well-documented, so most inventors turn their attention to these first. Getting a page or multiple pages on various social media sites will give you fast access to potential customers and show validity to your product through unsolicited testimonials posted to those sites.

Let Your Product Pitch Itself

Online innovation portals are the next step. These have low or no fees and allow inventors to pitch their products based on their own merits (through descriptions, pictures and videos that highlight the product features). Most importantly, they often offer great opportunities to become instantly visible to companies that are utilizing that portal as an aggregate for product procurement at a fraction of the cost.

Mega Mind Ideas is one such example. They are heavily invested in securing companies so inventors and entrepreneurs can be seen. It is co-owned by current NFL player Bernard Pollard. CEOs Brian Vickers and Pollard both saw a need to provide inventors like themselves a way to get their inventions in front of large companies and investors.

Another example is Efactor.com, the largest social network of entrepreneurs in the world. While not as focused on inventors, Efactor has around 20,000 accredited investors as a part of its platform in addition to entrepreneurs. Registering on web sites like Mega Mind Ideas and Efactor.com creates an additional -- and often more viable -- avenue to potential companies or investors.

As this type of online property is relatively new, do your due diligence and select the one that not only offers the best value, but best fits with your product. (Hint: Find out which companies in your niche are currently utilizing a particular innovation portal and go from there.)

Before you get started, here are some tips to keep in mind:

Prepare pages that showcase your product through various social media platforms (it's free and reaches a vast number of potential customers)

Do your due diligence on which online innovation portal(s) offer you the best opportunity to reach the right companies for you and your product

Promote your product through online innovation portal(s) using clear descriptions, plenty of illustrations or pictures, video and testimonials

Maintain these presences -- if your social media looks too dated, or if your product page isn't up to date, you may get overlooked.

No inventor wants to fail. Using cost effective, wide-reaching techniques definitely helps level the playing field.

Raoul Davis, partner at Ascendant Group, specializes in helping CEOs increase their visibility, revenues, and industry leadership status through a proprietary CEO branding model.