A new poll commissioned by CBS's "60 Minutes" and Vanity Fair magazine finds seemingly low support for a preemptive U.S. attack on Iran.

On Iran, the monthly poll, conducted by CBS's News Election and Survey Unit, asked, "Which one of the following would be most likely to cause you to support a U.S. war with Iran? 1. If Iran tests a nuclear bomb, or 2. If Iran attacks Israel, or 3. If Iran attacks the U.S. fleet in the Persian Gulf, or 4. Only if Iran attacks U.S. soil, or 5. Would you never support a war with Iran?" 25% of respondents said "only if Iran attacks U.S. soil;" 25% said "If Iran attacks the U.S. fleet in the Persian Gulf;" 11% said "If Iran tests a nuclear bomb;" and 10% said "If Iran attacks Israel." 24% of respondents said they would never support a war with Iran.

The poll was conducted at the CBS News interviewing facility among a random sample of 906 adults nationwide, interviewed by telephone September 6­–8, 2010, a press statement said.

It asks a somewhat jarring range of questions on the American pop cultural and political zeitgeist, from who Americans consider to be the world's most eligible single woman (Jennifer Aniston beat out Elin Nordegren); to what respondents consider to be the biggest waste of their time (36% of respondents said social networking), to what will bring humankind to an end (34% said "none of the above.")

The poll also found that 63% of respondents said they agree more with opponents to the proposed park51 Islamic community center than with its developer (30%).

UPDATE: Josh Block writes that the Iran question as asked by the above poll was which reason do Americans find to be the most compelling casus belli on Iran. I went back and forth with both organizations sponsoring the poll yesterday, which had (quite confusingly) written up the question asked differently at each site -- (at the Vanity Fair website, the question was described as which one of the following would be most likely to cause you to support U.S. war with Iran?, and at CBS's 60 Minutes site, the question was described as, Which would cause you to support war with Iran. Ultimately was told by CBS that the question as asked by the pollsters (and as reported above) is what one of the following reasons would be most likely to cause you to support U.S. war with Iran. Block in addition interprets the fact that 24% of people did not answer that any of those reasons -- an Iranian attack on U.S. soil, Iran attack on Israel, etc. etc. -- would make them support war with Iran means that the other three-quarters of Americans could be persuaded to support military action on Iran given the right catalyst. CBS's 60 Minutes wrote up the findings very differently: "Only 2 in 10 Americans would go to war with Iran if they either tested a bomb or attacked Israel. A quarter would go if they attacked U.S. soil and another quarter would go if they attacked the U.S. Fleet. Finally, still another quarter of those asked possibly wearied by years of war would not support a war with Iran under any circumstance."