A group of young American ex-pats with telekinetic and clairvoyant abilities are hiding from a clandestine U.S. government agency. They must utilize their different talents and band together for a final job enabling them to escape the agency forever. Written by Anonymous

Did You Know?

Trivia In Greek mythology, it was Cassandra who was given the gift of prophecy, but also cursed so that no one would ever believe her. In this movie, it is Cassie who is able to see the future but has a hard time convincing those around her. In Greek mythology, it was Cassandra who was given the gift of prophecy, but also cursed so that no one would ever believe her. In this movie, it is Cassie who is able to see the future but has a hard time convincing those around her. See more

Goofs After being freed from the trunk of a car during the shoot-out at the construction site, Nick picks up two guns. He is seen picking them up, holding them in the elevator, and still holding two when he presses against the wall, but as soon as he fires his first shot, he is only holding one gun with both hands. After being freed from the trunk of a car during the shoot-out at the construction site, Nick picks up two guns. He is seen picking them up, holding them in the elevator, and still holding two when he presses against the wall, but as soon as he fires his first shot, he is only holding one gun with both hands. See more

Quotes [ first lines ]

: Dad, what's happening?

: I need you to listen to me, like we're the last two people on the planet, okay Nick? Someday, a girl is going to give you a flower. You got that? A flower. And you have to help her, Nick. You help her, and you help us all. Okay? I know it doesn't make any sense right now, but I believe the woman who told me that. Do you think you can believe me?

[ Nick nods ]

: I love you. Know how I've said that you were special Nick? Turns out that I was right.

See more » Young Nick : Dad, what's happening? Nick's Father : I need you to listen to me, like we're the last two people on the planet, okay Nick? Someday, a girl is going to give you a flower. You got that? A flower. And you have to help her, Nick. You help her, and you help us all. Okay? I know it doesn't make any sense right now, but I believe the woman who told me that. Do you think you can believe me? Nick's Father : I love you. Know how I've said that you were special Nick? Turns out that I was right.