WHITE: I might have to stay in the Buzz Aldrin room.

ALDRIN: It’s gonna be there for a while—I hope. They might tear it down eventually and put up the name of somebody else who has been to Venus or Mercury. You’re in Memphis?

WHITE: Yeah, we’re playing here tonight. Where are you, Buzz?

ALDRIN: I’m in Los Angeles, in Century City. We’re occupying a temporary residence . . . I filed for divorce back in June. You don’t know about things like that, do you?

WHITE: [laughs] No, I’m not familiar.

ALDRIN: Anyway, I got a sweet young lady keeping me company.

EHRLICH: You live in Nashville now, don’t you, Jack?

WHITE: Yeah. I grew up in Detroit, but I’ve been living in Nashville for the last six or seven years.

ALDRIN: I understand that Detroit was a pretty rough place to grow up in the ’70s and ’80s.

WHITE: It was, man. But it’s got a stiff upper lip, that town.

ALDRIN: You get beat up? Mugged? Threatened?

WHITE: [laughs] Not too much. You know, I think you learn how to walk down the street in a certain way. I think you just learn to have a way about yourself, a style of walking down the street, that keeps people away from you.

EHRLICH: Did you actually grow up in the City of Detroit or in the suburbs?

WHITE: I grew up in the city. I don’t think there have been too many musicians who have made it out into the mainstream who are actually from the inner city of Detroit—except for the Motown artists, really.

EHRLICH: Did you grow up in the Cass Corridor?

WHITE: Yeah, close to the Cass Corridor, in southwest Detroit.

ALDRIN: I grew up in New Jersey, but it turns out I’ve been in California half of my life now.

WHITE: Really? You can’t resist the weather out there.

ALDRIN: It’s pretty good. But I travel quite a bit.

Ehrlich: Before we get too far, I had a quick question about space travel. I just got back from Thailand, and I’m really jet-lagged, and I’m sure Jack deals with that all of the time because of all of the traveling he does. But if you travel to the moon, Buzz, is there any sort of jet lag that you experience when you come back to Earth? Or is it not even an issue because you’re traveling so far beyond all the time zones?

ALDRIN: Well, we didn’t really have jet lag in the same way. We all wore watches and stayed on Houston time while we were gone so that we would be in sync with the mission crews and the flight crews controlling the mission. Of course, when we came back, we’d been away for eight days in reduced gravity or floating in zero gravity with the spacecraft going and coming, and it takes a while to get used to gravity again. We had to get our land legs—kind of like a sailor who has been rolling around on the ocean has to do. You feel like you’re really heavy for a day or so after you get back. All of that, of course, was overshadowed by the success that we had on the mission. But after we got back, we went on a tour of the world for 45 days, visiting kings and queens and all that. On that trip, there was jet lag.