Predictions and Picks

One thing is always certain in life. The time will pass… and it did. Week two is behind us, and we can already turn ourselves to the 2016 NFL Season week three. The first match awaits us on Thursday, and it’s a showdown between Texans and Patriots, so logically we will start our predictions with this match.

2016 NFL Season Week 3 Predictions and Picks

This one for sure is hard to predict. Patriots are the better team, better with Tom Brady that is. They are probably better with Jimmy Garoppolo too, but the thing is neither one of them is going to start. Brady won’t, that is 100% sure because of the suspension. Garoppolo’s start is under the question mark due to his shoulder injury. That leaves Patriots with a third choice rookie QB Jacoby Brissett who is in line to make his first ever NFL start. Texans have a good team and the even better start of the season. Their defense is looking better than ever, and that could be seen against the Jets and the Chiefs. On the other hand, there is this record that Patriots are so proud of. 28 straight home wins against non-divisional AFC teams since 2009.

Our pick: Patriots

Bengals had good games against Broncos in the last two seasons, and they almost won both times despite playing their second choice, QB AJ McCarron. These matches were played in Denver, but this one will be played in Cincinnati. Its Bengals home opener and they have a 4-0 score in their opening home games since 2012. Denver started the season with a 2-0 score, mostly relying on their defensive performance although their QB Trevor Siemian wasn’t bad. This time around that just won’t do.

Our pick: Bengals

Raiders won in Tennessee last year, and most likely they will repeat that feat this year. Despite allowing more than 500 yards a game in first two matches of the season, they have an offensive line and good QB that can back their defensive flaws. They scored points both vs. Falcons in their loss and against the Saints in their win. Their opponents, the Titans, are work in progress. They offense is not among best in the league, but with Mariota and DeMurray they are sure to cause problems for the Raiders. Defensively, they didn’t concede much against the Vikings (25) and Lions (15), but will have much more trouble against Derek Carr and his offensive line.

Our pick: Raiders

It’s been an eternity since the Cardinals last time came out victorious against the Bills. The last win in Buffalo was recorded in 1971. That is about to change in the week three of the 2016 NFL Season when Cardinals pay a visit to the shaken Bills. The Bills fired their offensive coordinator, but that won’t change anything. The 0-2 start is about to become 0-3 when they face talented Cardinals team. Cardinals are currently on a 1-1 score, with their only defeat coming in a match against New England Patriots. A close one at that.

Our pick: Cardinals

This game has “Ravens win” written all over it. Their good start to the season and 2-0 score are not a fluke but a result of their play. Wins against Bills and Browns are based on the good defensive game and well-coordinated offense. At the same time, Jaguars were torn to pieces by the San Diego Chargers. 38-14 was the score, and it was fully deserved. Against the Ravens, they are in for another beating.

Our pick: Ravens

Both teams had started the season with 0-2. One of these two teams is going to end the losing streak, and we believe that it will be the Miami Dolphins. Main reason for this statement, is that after Griffin III sustained injury, now the same has happened to Josh McCown. People are actually starting to believe that the Browns are cursed. With their third QB choice, rookie Cody Kessler, on the field in Dolphins home opener they just don’t have too many chances of winning.

Our pick: Dolphins

Redskins QB Kirk Cousins asked for a raise, and it seemed like he deserved one. After the Cowboys defeat, where he could, but failed to make an impact, it doesn’t look like he deserves his current paycheck. Now they are facing NY Giants and Eli Manning, on a turf where they didn’t record a win since 2011. Nothing is going to change this time around.

Our pick: Giants

Since Aaron Rogers became Packers QB, they have a 7-1 score in seasons openers at home. Against their upcoming opponents, the Detroit Lions, they have a mesmerizing score of 24-1. Their streak started in 1992, but it is important to mention that the one and only defeat in this streak against the Lions happened last year. Lions currently have 1-1 score, but that will change in negative direction after the game with Packers. They have lost week two match against unimpressive Titans, and they will suffer again against the Packers.

Our pick: Packers

This will be the duel of two very strong defensive teams. In the game where the defensive game prevails and brings the win, it’s important to use every chance when your time is on the drive. Panthers probably have a better defense than their rivals, and with Cam Newton on the helm they have a powerful offense. Vikings at the same time are playing without their starting QB Teddy Bridgewater and RB Adrian Peterson, so it’s not clear just how will they penetrate the Panther’s defense.

Our pick: Panthers

Seahawks are struggling offensively. They are averaging 8.5 points per game. Having a QB like Russel Wilson and scoring this little is a fact for in-depth analysis and longer debate than this one. Luckily for them, the defense was up to the task in both of their games so far, but only scoring 3 points against the Rams is something that must be addressed. In last four matches vs. 49ers, Seahawks have 4-0 score and each time they have won by a margin bigger than 10 points.

This season 49ers are averaging 27.5 points per game, and with score 1-1 they had a decent start to the season. An interesting fact is that they have won 28-0 against the Rams who won 9-3 against the Seahawks. We think that this won’t mean much in their meeting.

Our pick: Seahawks

Like every other team, Rams have good and bad sides. But, how to explain that team which lost 28-0 to 49ers went on and won against the Seahawks. In their win, they showed their weakness, and it’s offense. They only score 9 points in first two matches. The defense was the saving grace against the Seattle, but they can’t expect for the defense to pull them out every time. In the end, this is a duel of two teams; one is the unpredictable Rams and the other being very talented Buccaneers squad. Also, this is a duel between Jameis Winston and Case Keenum who is expected to start against the Tampa Bay. It’s fair to say that he didn’t impress in the first two matches, so Winston should easily outplay him.

Our pick: Buccaneers

2016 NFL Season week three is going to be tough for Eagles. Why? Steelers play well on the road; Steelers play excellent away against the NFC teams. Since the December of 2013 Steelers have a score of 5-1 when their opponents are from the NFC. Offensively and defensively they are a better team than Eagles.

Our pick: Steelers

If there is one thing about Chiefs offensive line, it is the fact that they don’t stand a chance against the Jets defensive line! First two weeks of the 2016 NFL Season were a living hell for Chiefs QB Alex Smith that was sacked seven times in that period. A same number of sacks was performed by the Jets in their first two outings. Despite the fact that Jets failed to record a win at the Arrowhead Stadium since 1998, the things are about to change.

Our pick: Jets

Judging from the last two seasons, the Colts are going to win this one fairly easily. In both of the last two seasons, Colts started with two defeats and then went on to record the win in the third week. An interesting fact is that the average number of points they scored in third weeks of 2014 and 2015 seasons is 39.5. Despite the trashing of Jaguars last week, Chargers could have trouble with free-scoring Colts.

Our pick: Colts

Dallas Cowboys have always had a problem when dealing with teams from NFC North. 3-9 is the score against them since 2010. This time around that could change. Dak Prescott is looking comfortable with leading his team, calling actions and coordinating the offense. Their defense is coming together and is starting to function as a team. Bears are at the 0-2 start and after Monday Night Football trashing from Eagles, their week was shorter than one of the Cowboys. Another thing that could be worst than Eagles defeat is the injury to their starting QB Jay Cutler. Cowboys are also playing without their starting QB Tony Romo, but Prescott looks like he can fill up his boots at a very high level. Can Hoyer do the same for Cutler?

Our pick: Cowboys

Primetime + Drew Brees = 14-2. This is the score that Saints have with Drew Brees in last 16 primetime outings. The problem is that both of these two defeats happened in last two seasons. Good thing, at least for the squad from New Orleans, is that Matt Ryan and the Falcons are 1-5 in primetime since 2008. Saints started the seasons with 0-2, and this home game is an opportunity for the first win. The thing that also goes in their favor is that Falcons are 5-9 ATS when coming off a win. They just don’t digest winning well.

Our pick: Saints

More NFL 2016 predictions, stay connect to Opptrends.com