Invention of antibiotics in the 1940s brought a new ray of hope for people dying from a myriad of infections that we simply do not consider serious any more. Since then, antibiotics allowed to save millions of lives and are still considered the greatest invention of the pharmaceutical industry.

However, nowadays the problem lies in antibiotic overuse for conditions that could be treated with natural remedies for plain colds or viral infections that do not respond to antibiotic treatment at all.

Most cases of colds or flu can be resolved by simple homeopathic and herbal sore throat remedies. However, if you feel that your sore throat symptoms last for several days, you have a fever over 103F, you have trouble swallowing and eating, definitely have your doctor examine your symptoms.

Once your doctor confirms a case of strep throat, you will be prescribed a course of antibiotics for strep throat that will help your body fight bacterial infection and prevent untreated strep throat complications.

If you suffer from chronic bouts of throat infections due to cryptic tonsils conditions, your doctor might recommend you undergo a tonsillectomy, a procedure to remove tonsils. White spots on tonsils are indentations in the tonsil tissues caused by chronic bacterial infections. These become chronic sources of infection that floods your body with toxins and should be removed to stop the vicious cycle of sore throats. Adult tonsillectomy recovery is much more lengthy and painful compared to tonsillectomy on younger patients.

Antibiotics for strep throat carry multiple pros and cons. You can get the most benefits from your antibiotics for strep throat if you religiously take them according to your doctor’s recommendations. If you fail to complete the course of your antibiotics, or you take them at erratic time intervals, chances are your strep throat symptoms will come back.

Appearance of antibiotic resistant bacteria is one of many cons of antibiotics for strep throat caused by drug overuse. Poor intestinal flora, constipation and low immune response could also be attributed to antibiotics for strep throat.