New laws passed last year paved the way for many of the intrusive powers of entry to be repealed as part of a Government drive to limit the occasions an official can enter a home.

But so far only 15 have been scrapped including several historic ones such as the power to search for and seize German enemy property and prevent illegal hypnotism displays.

Other powers such as a right to enter to ensure pot plants do not have pests or to check the height of a hedge remain in force.

Public bodies face having many more powers taken off them as part of an ongoing review but it could be several years before they are repealed.

A proposed new code of practice will also ensure those powers that do remain are used correctly and, where possible, allow home owners sufficient warning of planned searches.

However, civil liberty campaigners last night said since the Coalition took office the number of powers of entry has gone up.

The Protection of Freedoms Act was passed last year to roll back state intrusion and include a power to repeal powers of entry.

Government departments were ordered to review all their relevant powers and identify which ones were no longer necessary.

They have until May next year to complete the review but a six month progress report, published by the Home Office yesterday, showed virtually all the powers remain in place.

So far only 15 have been repealed.

They include an order drawn up in 1950 to search and seize German enemy property and a power under the 1952 Hynotism Act to “enter premises where entertainment is held if there is reasonable cause to believe that there is a contravention of the Act”.

However, still in force is a power under the Plant Health Order 2005 to check if pot plant contain pests.

Under the Anti-Social Behaviour Act 2003, officials can still survey a home and garden to see if hedges are too high while a power under energy legislation allows for entry to check the efficiency ratings of a refrigerator.

Nick Pickles, director of campaign group Big Brother Watch, said: “It beggars belief that even after six months of working on this issue, some departments still have no idea what powers of entry they are able to use.

“The Home Office’s approach smacks of trying to bury the issue in a sea of paperwork and consultations despite widespread cross-party support for rolling back these intrusive powers.”

He added: “Given breaching the code will not be a criminal or civil offence, it’s hard to see how an extra bit of paperwork makes the slightest bit of difference to people facing overzealous officials wanting to enter their house to see if their pot plants have pests or what energy rating their fridge is.”

As part of the review a proposed new code of practice around powers of entry in now under consultation.

It suggests, where appropriate, home owners should be given 48 hours notice and official should not enter a home with the owner’s consent or before obtaining a warrant.

The use of force to enter must only be used where is expressly permitted in law, it adds.

Lord Taylor, the minister for criminal information, said: “This government is rolling back unnecessary state intrusion into people’s private lives.

“Powers of entry will always be vital for the investigation of crime, but this new code of practice will ensure they are used proportionately and not abused.”