The above and below photos show Marsha Gay Reynolds, the JetBlue flight attendant who is being accused of kicking off her Gucci shoes and taking off when Marsha was pulled from a security line at Los Angeles International Airport for a secondary screening. Marsha Gay reportedly had good reason to run, because that suitcase in Reynolds grasp held about 70 pounds of cocaine — worth nearly $3 million.

[Photo by Los Angeles Airport Police] According to NBC, 32-year-old Marsha Gay was in custody on Wednesday after Reynolds surrendered to authorities in New York. Marsha was a beauty queen in Jamaica previously, and photos on Facebook and Twitter are circulating of Marsha Gay.

On the Facebook page titled Marshagay Reynolds, Marsha published a note on November 6, 2008, which is titled i rise.

“… out of the huts of history’s shame

i rise

up from a past that’s rooted in pain

i rise

i’m a black ocean, leaping and wide, welling and swelling

i bear in the tide. leaving behind nights of terror and fear

i rise

into a daybreak that’s wondrously clear

i rise

bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave,

i am the dream and the hope of the slave

i rise

i rise

i rise.”

On Reynolds’ Facebook photos page, there are reportedly no photos to show, save for the Facebook profile photo of “Marshagay,” which shows Reynolds in sunglasses and a bikini top. Marsha’s Facebook overview states that Reynolds “Studied English and American Literature, Creative Writing at NYU, Class of 2007.”

As seen in the following photo, Marsha Gay is all dolled up in her beauty queen attire.

A photo shows “second runner up Marsha-Gay Reynolds” from Saturday, August 16, 2008. According to Bonita Jamaica, Reynolds participated in the Miss Jamaica 2008 contest.

As reported by Jamaica Gleaner, Marsha also nabbed a top five spot in the Miss Jamaica Universe 2007 contest.

The photo gallery of Reynolds, as reported by Heavy, shows Marsha-Gay in her bikini attire.

Now Reynolds is being charged with cocaine possession and intent to distribute. The next photo shows the large amount of cocaine bricks that Reynolds is being accused of trying to smuggle past security.

Marsha Gay was missing since Friday, the day Reynolds got nervous after flashing her JetBlue badge — and instead of being allowed through unscathed, was chosen for a random inspection. Marsha Gay began speaking in a foreign language on the phone before Reynolds fled, reports the Los Angeles Times. Marsha acted nervous once she was blocked from whizzing through security, and trailed behind TSA agents who escorted Reynolds to the screening area — then Marsha ran down an up escalator and escaped.

Reynolds left behind condoms, around $5 in cash and took a JetBlue flight to the eastern seaboard on Saturday, where she eventually surrendered.

Due to the large amount of cocaine Reynolds allegedly tried to smuggle, authorities believe it likely wasn’t Marsha Gay’s first attempt at doing so. Reynolds’ situation has renewed the debate over whether airline personnel like Marsha-Gay should undergo the same rigorous screening process as normal travelers.

Meanwhile, folks on social media are noting reports that Reynolds was on a 2004 women’s track and field team. Marsha Gay is being compared to the movie character in the title role of Jackie Brown, wherein a flight attendant was caught smuggling money for an arms dealer.

Because Reynolds studied writing and literature, folks are also noting that Marsha-Gay will have plenty of time to write about her adventures in allegedly smuggling 11 packs of cocaine.

Facebook reports “Marsha Reynolds” as a popular search term, with nearly 70,000 people talking about Reynolds on Facebook as of this writing.

[Photo by Los Angeles Airport Police]