NewsAbortion

“Hey, politicians: The 1950’s called, they want their sexism back.” In retro-style script, so reads the hot pink t-shirt designed by 29-year-old Avengers star Scarlett Johansson to raise money for Planned Parenthood Action Fund, the abortion giant’s political arm.

Johansson’s is the first in a planned series of celebrity-designed t-shirts supporting Planned Parenthood’s “Women Are Watching” campaign, which will target Republican supporters of the Supreme Court’s recent Hobby Lobby decision for defeat in the upcoming midterm elections.

“When I heard that some politicians were cheering the Supreme Court’s decision to give bosses the right to interfere in our access to birth control, I thought I had woken up in another decade,” said Johansson in a statement. She was referring to the Hobby Lobby case, in which justices unanimously ruled that employers cannot be forced to provide insurance coverage for procedures and drugs that violate their sincerely held religious beliefs, as ObamaCare’s HHS mandate had ordered them to do.

“Like many of my friends, I was appalled by the thought of men taking away women's ability to make our own personal health care decisions,” the actress said. “That's when I knew I couldn't sit on the sidelines and why I'm proud to support Planned Parenthood Action Fund's Women are Watching campaign to ensure that young women know the high stakes for women's health and rights this November.”

“Women are watching,” Johansson added, “and we will fight for candidates who will ensure that birth control is affordable and who will protect access to safe and legal abortion.”

Click "like" if you are PRO-LIFE!

Johansson, 29, is no newcomer to pro-abortion advocacy. Previously, the actress appeared in a 2012 MoveOn.org campaign ad blasting Republican presidential contender Mitt Romney for pledging to defund Planned Parenthood. She also spoke at the Democratic National Convention praising the abortion group. In 2006, she attacked then-president George W. Bush for his opposition on abortion, telling Cosmopolitan, “You know, we're supposed to be liberated in this country, but if our president had his way, we wouldn't be educated about sex at all. Every woman would have six children, and women wouldn't be able to have abortions.”

Johansson’s shirt, which sells for $25 at PPAF’s website, will soon be joined by designs from actresses Gabrielle Union, Natasha Lyonne, and Selenis Leyva. Union is currently starring in BET’s Being Mary Jane. Lyonne and Leyva co-star in the Netflix streaming series Orange is the New Black.