NEW DELHI: Rocked by reports of rapes and molestation of women tourists, the National Tourism Advisory Council has recommended a slew of measures including flying squads, mobile apps, a 24-hour helpline and a media campaign to tackle the issue. The measures will be sent to all the states for their views and further action.Union tourism minister K Chiranjeevi said that safety of tourists, particularly for foreign women tourists, is an area of concern. Chairing the meeting of NTAC he said he had written to all chief ministers to take effective steps to create conducive and friendly atmosphere for all tourists.According to senior tourism official, the ministry had already made progress in establishing a 24x7 helpline in several languages. "We could augment this mechanism by introducing a mobile app that would set off an emergency SOS to the helpline call centre and flying squads to assist foreign tourists,’’ the official said.The NTAC members also suggested that tourism police, including home guards, ex-army officers and NCC cadets, be set up in all the states. "We felt that there should be a media campaign to assure tourists that India is safe. We are 62nd in the world when it comes to rapes, but the impression given is far more negative,’’ Subhash Goyal, president of Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO), said.Goyal also suggested that the helpline number could be prominently displayed on the disembarkation card for the convenience of tourists.The ministry has already made plans to start a multi-lingual helpline that would assist tourists in finding accommodation, transport, information on currency, cuisine and other tourist related facilities. "We are considering expanding the scope of the helpline to provide an emergency response also,’’ the official said.The meeting also discussed hygiene issues with several people expressing dissatisfaction at the filthy surroundings of most monuments and tourist places. Former cricketer and MP Mohd. Azaharuddin said, "The ministry should take steps to improve the hygienic conditions and cleanliness around religious places.’’ He shared his own experience about his visit to Hazrat Nizamuddin dargah and suggested that awareness programmes to maintain cleanliness around religious pilgrimages should be made.