Request by This one, of them all, definitely took the longest to complete, for fairly obvious reasons. (A.K.A. More 'scenery,' yet not really. LoL)Once more, the request was to draw the ponies within their human forms, without the skin tones originally given, and then to also make them each a Guardian of the Veil (and also notable allies).In the case of Sunset Shimmer, here, however, she was requested last minute, in general, but also if she could take the position of Orube/'Rebecca Rudolph,' and her "Might wanna start running, because I'm about to literally kick your ass" fighting attire (with same pose, another fave of mine).And, once again, as I do not watch the series or am involved within the community as a result, I had to ask SEGASister for lots of info, one of which was what people usually make the ponies, ethnicity and/or ancestry wise, whenever drawn within human form. However, this time around, since, according to her, this one's a pretty new character, 'no one' really knows or has a set ethnicity upon her yet.Sooooo, I just left her more or less the skin tone she does possess within the canon.And as for the hairstyle, it was rather "....Huh...." when looking at the reference SEGASister gave me, and then also looking at a few on Google and seeing she seems to have two, but . . . not . . . really? o_O' LoL EITHER way, I used the ref SEGA gave, which I can say to YOU, those viewing/reading this, that think of it as Sunset assuming Orube's role even more, in the sense that when Orube's within her 'fighter garb,' her hairstyle is different by comparison to when she's masquerading around as 'Innocent Earth Civilian' Rebecca.Also, I did decide to keep, or show, rather, her pony ear, as well as keeping Orube's rather long kitty-like nails within combination just to sort of maintain the "I'm actually an alien, and your Earthly ways and customs are just . . . wtf to me at the moment" notion of Orube's character within the beginning.Finally, as for the scowl, again, I know zero about Sunset Shimmer, but am assuming she's clearly the typical counterpart most series do where main characters are concerned. So she's most probably Twilight Sparkle's rival, or was, judging from a few of the screenshots I saw within Google Images. Regardless, I used, or 'kept' the scowl I kept seeing on her face within said image search . . . which works with this pose, considering she's being Orube at the moment, and probably about to beat someone's ass into the ground, anyway.ANYWAY! Was really fun to attempt drawing Orube-related crap, again (since I haven't in years and years, since the first, and 'last' Orube drawing I'd done during my beginnings of attempting more active color-based works), even if I had to 'morph' her head into another person's . . . which took a few tries to get it ALL right, overall.Still.I'M just glad I'm FINALLY done with this damned 'series' (not the show-series, although it's still not my personal cup of tea, this version, nope ^_^' But I STILL have my soft spot for cutie Fluttershy, gotdamn it >_< LoL), because it just feels like I've been doing it my entire pregnancy . . . which, technically, I have, now being 2 weeks away from meeting Evie.NEXT time someone asks for possible MLP artwork, I'll definitely reopen my commissions for them, if they'll be this many, again, anyway. ^_^' Phew. . . .--------------------