"The best thing about freshmen is that they become sophomores." - Al McGuire

1st Half 2nd Half Final Penn State 41 42 83 Illinois 29 41 70

There's still a little freshman-like substance floating around the Penn State basketball program, but after the Nittany Lions' (14-12, 6-7) dominating 83-70 win at Illinois on Saturday afternoon, it's hard to tell which players have been college students for just a few months. The Lions crashed what was supposed to be a big stretch run for Illinois' postseason push, controlling all facets of the game for 35 minutes in their second Big Ten road win of the season.

Game Leaders

Scoring [PSU] Banks (24) [ILL] Hill (14) Rebounds [PSU] Watkins (9) [ILL] Finke (5) Assists [PSU] Carr (3) [ILL] Lucas (7) Steals [PSU] Reaves (3) [ILL] Coleman-Lands/Lucas (2) Blocks [PSU] Watkins (2) [ILL] 8 Tied (0)

It felt very much like the Nittany Lions picked up where they left off from the first half of this fixture in Happy Valley. The Illini kept it tight for the first 10 minutes, but Penn State's offense lit up the State Farm Center as halftime neared. Payton Banks broke out of his slump with 15 points before the break, but it was Mike Watkins coming through with 17 huge minutes that set the tone.

Pat Chambers tried to experiment with Davis Zemgulis at the five in Julian Moore's absence (illness), but when he picked up two quick fouls in less than a minute with 15 left to play in the half, Watkins stepped back onto the floor and established himself as a force on the inside, despite a modest line of five points and five boards. Illinois was only able to put up 0.88 points per possession in the half thanks to Malcolm Hill, so often the program's only saving grace under John Groce.

But just as the Illini nearly came back from 20 in State College, they whittled the lead down to five thanks to a 14-0 run with five minutes left in the game capped off by a Tracy Abrams three. But Banks and Lamar Stevens came up with huge and-1 plays on back-to-back possessions to put Penn State back up to double digits. The game would not get close again, thanks to some big shot-making from Tony Carr, who we're affectionately dubbing The Young Pope. (Roar Lions Roar is not affiliated with HBO or Jude Law in any capacity).

WHAT A SHOT BY TONY CARR pic.twitter.com/rsGA5pznsy — Roar Lions Roar (@RLRblog) February 11, 2017

Once again the freshmen were huge. Carr, Stevens and Watkins combined for 47 points, with the latter freshman racking up a career-high 32 minutes while committing only three fouls. Carr and Stevens were irresistible offensively, getting to their spots at will and combining for 14-for-26 shooting. When you add in Banks' career-high tying 24 points, it's no surprise that Penn State earned a win on this occasion.

Penn State needed a road win down the stretch in order to keep some NIT hopes alive. With one under their belt, they'll have another opportunity against Nebraska on Tuesday night in Lincoln. Pinnacle Bank Arena is one of the toughest places to play in the Big Ten, and the Huskers sport one of the conference's best backcourts in Glynn Watson and Tai Webster. It'll take another gutsy effort to record a second road win in a row.

Four Factors



Possessions PPP eFG% OReb% TO% FTRate Penn State 69 1.20 63.7% 26.3% 20.3% 39.2% Illinois 1.01 56.0% 21.4% 20.3% 44.0%

There's not much to analyze here: Penn State scorched the nets. It's an especially impressive shooting day considering how few of their looks came easily. The Lions only posted four fast break points in 40 minutes. Carr and Stevens were excellent from midrange – a tad ironic, given Illinois' penchant for that shot under Groce – and Banks was superb with the ball, scoring from every level.

Julian Moore hasn't been much of a rebounder this season, but it's still surprising to see how well PSU controlled the glass on the road. Illinois' leading rebounder was point guard Tracy Abrams. That says a lot about how well Watkins played and how hot Penn State was shooting the ball. There just weren't many rebounds for Illinois to gather.

Player Notes

