Clearly having a soul, or reason, is not required to spew one’s blather out into the social media world. Otherwise, social media would have ended pretty damn quickly ages ago. Twitter, like its fellow platforms, is a cesspool for all sorts of people, including the famous and infamous. Some are hilarious and endearing. Many are hateful and obnoxious. For every George Takei and Reese Witherspoon, there are a dozen socially-challenged schmucks like Donald Trump and ‘Pharma Bro’ Martin Shkreli.

Shkreli, apparently intent on becoming one of the most hated people on the planet, is best known for jacking up the prices on Daraprim, an antiparasitic drug, by over 5000%. Shortly after he was arrested by the FBI on charges of securities fraud. He is currently out on bond awaiting his trial. Yeah, he’s a real piece of work. Included in his laundry list of remarkable talents is the trademark smirk he often flaunts to the camera and pithy comebacks on social media. Seriously, this guy apparently needs vehement human loathing to function.

Now enter actor and comedian Patton Oswalt (Ratatouille, Agents of SHIELD). He’s another celeb that doesn’t mince words during his frequent turns on Twitter. Lately, he’s taken aim at presidential candidate Donald Trump–you know, like most of the free world. After a soft jab at the #TrumpCantSwim hashtag, Shkreli decided to start in on Oswalt. What followed was a slew of insults between the two. None were particularly amusing or clever, but it was entertaining if nothing else.

Then Chris Evans (aka Captain America) happened to comment on the spat:

@pattonoswalt owning @MartinShkreli is my favorite thing on Twitter right now. — Chris Evans (@ChrisEvans) September 7, 2016

Apparently, it offended Shkreli the actor even mentioned his name. First, he “excused” Oswalt as a widower. Oswalt’s wife, true crime writer Michelle McNamara, recently passed away unexpectedly in her sleep at the age of 46. Afterwards, he flung some choice words at Evans:

Comedian gets a pass because wife died but you, @ChrisEvans, I’ll fucking destroy. Pretty boy, shit-for-brains. Think your thoughts matter? — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) September 7, 2016

Shkreli claimed he didn’t even know who Evans is. Yeah. We believe him.

@JTW218 @ChrisEvans @pattonoswalt i had to look him up. actors are worthless. i brought a new kidney drug to the world today after 5 years — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) September 7, 2016

After that? He. Cannot. Let. It. Go.

You have to be a true idiot to watch and like a superhero movie. CC: @ChrisEvans — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) September 7, 2016

Come to Brooklyn and I’ll introduce you to the real Captain America and a couple of fuckin roundhouses if you say my name again @ChrisEvans — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) September 7, 2016

.@ChrisEvans gonna respond with “you’re going to roundhouse those drug prices” or some dumb shit and 1 mil liberals are gonna scream ‘owned’ — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) September 7, 2016

The icing on the cake? Shkreli’s video aimed directly at Evans. He challenges the actor to go to Brooklyn and “start some shit.” Hard to tell how serious he is though because he’s also showing off his “guns.”

Perhaps we’ve been dipping into some our own inventory there?

Meanwhile, Evans has yet to give Shkreli’s tantrum the time of day. We assume he’s busy pursuing more meaningful activities like not defrauding investors, not price-gouging pharmaceuticals and generally not being a git on parade. In fact, Evans is currently busy using his fame for good by spending time with cancer patients and helping raise money for Christopher’s Haven, a non-profit that aids families of children with cancer in Boston.

@baseballcs07 well that’s cool cause you’re mine! Great hanging with you, bud! — Chris Evans (@ChrisEvans) August 16, 2016

@ChrisEvans our hero at chris_haven. Thanks for your love — Christopher’s Haven (@chris_haven) September 3, 2016

While Evans may only portray a superhero onscreen, it’s refreshing to see Cap still inspires him on his downtime. As for Shkreli, clearly some people have to find something to do with their time while waiting for their trial date.

Images via Marvel (Walt Disney Studios), The Observer, Martin Shkreli Twitter page

Posted By Denise Heard-Bashur Managing editor for GeekFeed.com living in the desolation of the west Texas desert. Proud mom, photo editor by day, former film major, MCU maven. Founder of the Free Snowpiercer & Free Loki campaigns. Also hung up on LOTR, Star Wars, Game of Thrones, Outlander, Friends, and cinema in general. Good, bad...it's all awesome. I'm a firm believer that if you haven't read the book yet, see the movie first. Saves on tons of disappointment and spoilers. SAN DIMAS HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL RULES! Managing editor for GeekFeed.com living in the desolation of the west Texas desert. Proud mom, photo editor by day, former film major, MCU maven. Founder of the Free Snowpiercer & Free Loki campaigns. Also hung up on LOTR, Star Wars, Game of Thrones, Outlander, Friends, and cinema in general. Good, bad...it's all awesome. I'm a firm believer that if you haven't read the book yet, see the movie first. Saves on tons of disappointment and spoilers. SAN DIMAS HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL RULES!



You might also like