Moscow and Beijing have a lot in common: a 2,500-mile border, a $400 billion gas deal, strongman leaders with a ken for opposing the U.S-dominant West — and a mutual love of Russian President Vladimir Putin.

Heads of both states are motivated by keeping the U.S. sphere of influence — whether in Ukraine or the South China Sea – in check, but they’re on opposite sides of the European Union referendum or “Brexit” debate.

China’s political elites, according to leading Chinese newspaper Global Times, are “anxious over the political consequences” of a 'Yes' vote Thursday, and have publicly expressed their hope that Britons will choose to remain in the EU.

Putin, meanwhile, has not explicitly come out in favor of the U.K.’s departure, despite British Prime Minister David Cameron’s claims to the contrary, but an analysis of Kremlin-controlled media suggest their editorial line was strongly tilted in support of Brexit.

International Business Times takes a closer look at what these geopolitical behemoths have to gain — and lose — from Britain saying “Hasta la vista” to Europa.

WIN:

Crisis in the EU is a blessing for Moscow: Without the U.K. — one of the most vocal supporters of the EU’s sanctions regime against Russia — Russian officials say pressure on the Kremlin will be reduced, leading to significant foreign policy benefits. A weaker Europe is a weaker NATO: The disintegration of the EU could translate into a weakening of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, long regarded by Russia as a political and military threat. More opportunities for bilateral trade: Both China and Russia could benefit from stronger economic ties with London, as an isolated U.K. pushes for increased cooperation in a range of fields, including the financial sector. Less financial regulation: If Britain votes to leave, restrictions imposed on the country’s financial sector by the EU might be loosened, prompting a boost in financing for Chinese and Russian investment projects.

Photo: Reuters

LOSE: