The Philadelphia media is one of the most race-adverse media outlets in the country. They do anything and everything to hide the facts of race-based assaults and killings. Such is the case in Upper Darby PA where a 12-year-old white boy, Bailey O’Neill, was jumped and beaten in school by two black kids.

Baily was rushed to the hospital, spent 2 months on life-support, and died this week.

The kids who killed him? They were suspended from school for two days.

Jesse Jackson would be proud.

Maybe – because of quotas for black discipline – they are waiting for two white kids to kill a black kid, then they can expel the black abusers and arrest them. It’s affirmative action combined with adverse impact (quota) rules…. or something. Ask 2-J’s to explain it. Or ask President Obama who implemented it in his August Executive Order.

PENNSYLVANIA – A suburban Philadelphia sixth-grader was pulled off life support Sunday, a day after his 12th birthday and almost two months since he was punched in the face in a perceived bullying attack at school.

Southeast Delco School District officials confirmed that Bailey O’Neill, who had been in the hospital in a medically induced coma, has died.

One of the two tormenters punched him so hard that he broke the boy’s nose and left him with a concussion, NBC 10 Philadelphia reported. The students who reportedly jumped O’Neill were suspended from school for two days.

“Our school community is deeply saddened by this loss,” schools Superintendent Stephen Butz said in a statement Monday. “Our condolences are with Bailey’s family and friends during this very difficult time.”

Butz said the school district is continuing to work with local authorities, who haven’t filed charges against the two students involved in the Jan. 10 altercation in the schoolyard at Darby Township School.

The case remains an “ongoing, active criminal investigation,” a spokeswoman for Delaware County District Attorney Jack Whelan told the Daily News.

One of the two tormenters punched him so hard that he broke the boy’s nose and left him with a concussion, NBC 10 Philadelphia reported. The students who reportedly jumped O’Neill were suspended from school for two days. (read more of the politically correct, race absent, article)

Unfortunately, a reporter decided to show up at the home of one of the kids who killed him and ask his dad how he felt. Whoopsie – he’s black…… Shocker !

Advertisements