Brett Favre isn’t messing around this time.

Article continues below ...

He’s finished playing football. For good.

We think.

Two sources told FOXSports.com on Monday that Favre has already filed his retirement papers with the NFL, just weeks after the end of his 20th season.

While he could still change his mind, as he did in the 2008 and 2009 offseasons, there is no indication Favre will return. The 41-year-old quarterback stated 2010 was his final season after rejoining the Vikings in August and reiterated that intent throughout an injury-plagued campaign.

Favre’s NFL-record string of 297 consecutive regular-season starts ended last month when he was forced to miss a mid-December game against the New York Giants because of a shoulder injury. Favre returned the following week against Chicago but suffered a concussion that sidelined him for Minnesota’s final two contests.

Favre had one of his most disappointing seasons in 2010. He threw 19 touchdowns compared to 11 interceptions and finished with his lowest completion percentage (60.6) since 2006. Favre also was fined $50,000 for not being forthright with NFL commissioner Roger Goodell in an investigation involving alleged sexual harassment against a fellow former New York Jets employee (media personality Jenn Sterger) in 2008.

Favre, though, is still considered a future first-ballot Hall of Fame selection with one Super Bowl title and most NFL career passing records in his name.

Favre initially retired in the 2008 offseason while with Green Bay. The Packers placed him on their reserve/retired list. His attempt to return to the team that summer was rebuffed by Packers management, which led to Favre being traded to the Jets. Favre played there for one season before submitting retirement papers to the NFL on Feb. 11, 2009. Favre was later granted reinstatement and signed to play with the Vikings.

Favre had one of his best seasons in 2009, leading the Vikings to the NFC Championship Game against New Orleans. Favre was cajoled into returning in August by Vikings teammates who visited him in Mississippi and team management that increased his 2010 base salary to $16 million.