President-elect Donald Trump Donald John TrumpHouse committee believes it has evidence Trump requested putting ally in charge of Cohen probe: report Vietnamese airline takes steps to open flights to US on sidelines of Trump-Kim summit Manafort's attorneys say he should get less than 10 years in prison MORE announced Thursday that Monica Crowley will have a national security role in his incoming administration.

Crowley will serve as senior director of strategic communications for the National Security Council, the Trump transition team said in a statement.

Top national security adviser retired Army Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn said he is "honored" to have Crowley join the team, along with retired Lt. Gen. Keith Kellogg, who will serve as the council's chief of staff.

Crowley, a former Fox News analyst as of Thursday, has been rumored for a position since the Republican's victory on Nov. 8.

"I am deeply honored, humbled and grateful to be asked by the President-elect to join the extraordinary national security team he is assembling,” Crowley said in the statement. “With vision, courage and moral clarity, he is committed fully to re-establishing America's singular place in the world. He is also committed to selecting the best people for the jobs of keeping the American people safe and the country secure. It will be a great privilege to serve with them."

ADVERTISEMENT

Upon hearing the news of her appointment, Fox News terminated Crowley's contract, effective immediately, a network spokesperson told The Hill.

Crowley is also a syndicated radio host and Washington Times contributor.

Crowley, 48, began her political career as a foreign policy assistant to former President Richard Nixon from 1990 to 1994, well after he resigned from office.

She is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and earned a Ph.D. from Columbia University in international affairs.

Crowley has been a staunch critic of the Obama administration during the last eight years, especially former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonSanders: 'I fully expect' fair treatment by DNC in 2020 after 'not quite even handed' 2016 primary Sanders: 'Damn right' I'll make the large corporations pay 'fair share of taxes' Former Sanders campaign spokesman: Clinton staff are 'biggest a--holes in American politics' MORE's policy positions.

Former Fox News analyst K.T. McFarland, who served in the Ronald Reagan administration, was named to Trump’s national security team last month as deputy national security adviser.

--This report was updated at 2:23 p.m.