Pictured: Jon Gosselin pulling gun on paparazzo trespassing on his property... as ex-wife Kate says she's 'not surprised' by his actions



Photographs have emerged showing Jon Gosselin pulling a gun at a paparazza outside his Pennsylvania home on Friday,



According to TMZ, Jon brandished his firearm when he saw the snapper and fired a warning shot.

The photographs show the the 36-year-old former reality star in a black T-shirt, pulling out a gun in the back pocket of his baggy trousers.

Scroll down for video



Pictured: Jon Gosselin pulls a gun out from his back pocket at a photographer after she tried to follow him back to his home in Beckersville, Pennysylvania on Friday



It's my right: Jon later defended his use of the firearm



The incident happened after the photographer followed Jon home from the Beckersville restaurant where he works in an attempt to obtain photographs of the cabin where he lives.

The snapper caught up with Jon, but as soon as she started taking pictures, he is said to have angrily shouted at her that she was trespassing on private property.

She made a quick exit, but Gosselin 'chased the photographer until she was back on a main road.'

Meanwhile, his ex-wife Kate Gosselin was not shocked at Jon's rather rash actions.

'I'm not surprised,' she told TMZ ; adding that she hadn't previously heard about her former husband's behaviour. 'I don't pay attention to what he does.'

Kate was then asked if she was 'at all concerned [about Jon's actions] given the fact you guys have joint custody.'

Not shocked: Kate Gosselin, pictured on Saturday, said she was unsurprised at the news of ex-husband Jon's actions

Fall from grace: The former reality star lives in this shack in the woods in Pennsylvania where he is alleged to have pulled a gun out and fired a warning shot at a photographer

Happier times: Jon pictured with his wife Kate at an event in April 2009 just before their show 'Jon & Kate Plus 8' ended

'I'll let you answer that,' Kate replied as she loaded shopping into her car. 'Nothing surprises me anymore.'



However, the father of eight feels he acted within his legal rights when he fired a shot to warn off a trespassing photographer.

Defending his actions, Jon told TMZ : 'I am licensed to carry a concealed handgun, which I withdrew and used to fire a warning shot AWAY from the paparazza.'

He added, 'It is well within my rights under Pennsylvania law when someone is trespassing on private property.'



This latest incident represents yet another blow for the star, who recently told Entertainment Tonight how he has struggled to find work since the cheating scandal and expensive divorce from his ex-wife Kate .

Jon now works at a restaurant waiting tables to make ends meet and lives in a cabin in the woods with no internet or television.



He also pays no child support to Kate whom he divorced in 2009.



'I don't have a relationship with Kate. There is no relationship. Text and email. That's it,' he added. 'I don't physically see her.'

Jon appeared on family reality show Jon & Kate Plus 8 for five seasons before the series was renamed Kate Plus Eight after the couple's break up.



However, TLC announced that the series would be cancelled after it reached 150 episodes and the last episode aired on September 12, 2011.



