ABOUT Traders Guild

General Rules

English only.



No personal attacks, racism or begging.



Trading of accounts / exploited keys is prohibited.



Do not advertise sites or links without permission from the group officers.



No harassing users or interfering with their trades. Any trade is fine as long as they abide by the rules.



All trades must abide by Steam rules and any other rules imposed by the source of your trade items (if applicable).

Group Chat Rules

No guesting allowed. Please join the group if you want to use our chat.



1 ad every 3 minutes. This may be changed during peak seasons.



Maximum of 2 game / item images per post.



No more than 3 lines per post. (Guideline here [i.imgur.com] )



) No more than 3 emotes per post.



No vulgar posts, prank links, adult / criminal content, or any kind of disruptive trolling.



Do not spam/flood. Unrequested ads via PM are also considered spam.



Please follow basic chat etiquette.

Forum and Comment Rules

One thread/Post per 12 hours.



Do not trade real money (paypal, webmoney etc) outside of Steam. Steam wallet is ok.

Useful Links

[forums.steamrep.com]

This group is for traders who are looking for the best deals or just want to hangout!You may post trades on the Trade Offers sub-forum, the comment section below or in our chat room.Various translations of the group rules can be found here Failure to comply with the rules will result in a kick. Repeated or serious offenses will result in a ban.Do not disrespect the group officers' decisions. It is at the sole discretion of the group officers to manage the group to maintain a fair trading environment. If you disagree with a group officer, please speak with the officer in a respectful manner. Harassment or being vulgar / rude will only make it worse for you.These rules are subject to change at any time and we'll try our best to inform you if any new changes take effect. Thank you for reading and happy trading!The group officers can serve as middlemen for your trades. Just ask and we can help if we're not busy.Introduce yourself or ask questions here!Spotted a scammer in the group? Get scammed? Report them here so we can kick them out of the group to make the group safer.Check here before doing any trades! Also Check the forums too! Scammers might have been reported but not marked yet.