Get ready to quit the EU now, Davis tells the Tories as he tears into Cameron and predicts UKIP will triumph at Euro elections



Former Tory chairman David Davis urged Government to open talks with Brussels about Britain quitting the EU

Davis, who challenged Cameron for leadership in 2005, said PM has made a mess of winning back powers from the EU

He said quitting the EU would be a 'revolution' and would spur jobs

The senior politician could be positioning himself for another leadership bid should UKIP embarrass the Conservatives in next month's Euro elections



David Davis said quitting the EU would be a 'revolution' and would spur growth

The Tory revolt over Europe took a dramatic turn last night after senior Conservative David Davis called on the Government to open talks with Brussels on quitting the EU.



Former Tory chairman Mr Davis tore into David Cameron, accusing him of making a mess of his pledge to win back powers from the EU.



‘Scaremongers’ who said Britain would collapse if it decided to go it alone were talking nonsense, said Mr Davis. Quitting the EU would be like a ‘revolution’ and would boost UK jobs, wages, world power, arts and prestige, he added.



Significantly, his intervention comes days after two televised political debates in which anti-EU leader of UKIP, Nigel Farage, crushed pro-EU Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg.



And it will spark claims that Mr Davis is turning himself into a Tory version of Mr Farage, ready to exploit the leadership crisis Mr Cameron would face if UKIP makes big gains in next month’s Euro elections.



Mr Davis, who was beaten by Mr Cameron in the 2005 party leadership contest and who is a former Minister for Europe, writes in today’s Mail on Sunday: ‘Exit from Europe is not something to be afraid of. Some of the greatest growth spurts in history have occurred after revolutions: this would be a revolution of expectations and ambition.’



Britain should quit the EU or force Brussels to make massive concessions, he says.



Mr Cameron’s refusal to threaten to leave if he did not win back key powers in renegotiations before an ‘in / out’ referendum was a big error, he says.



Former SAS reservist Mr Davis predicts that Mr Farage will win the Euro elections, humiliating the Conservatives.

Davis accused Prime Minister David Cameron of making a mess of his pledge to win back powers from the EU

His comments fly in the face of Mr Cameron’s order to Euro rebels not to rock the boat in the run-up to the May elections.



A Tory MP ally of the Prime Minister claimed last night: ‘Davis is trying to use Farage to reheat his leadership ambitions. He won’t get anywhere.’

