Don't be misled into considering Milt Jacskson's talent and influence only when away from the MJQ--that long-lived quartet led by pianist John Lewis and including bassist Percy Heath, drummer Connie Kay and, of course, Milt Jackson ("Bags"). I'm afraid that arguably this most enduring small jazz ensemble (rivaled only by Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers as an enduring entit) has not received the attention it deserves after the illnesses of Kay and Heath forced Lewis to deband the group and go the rest of the way on his own). it's true that Lewis imposed a kind of "baroque minimalist" on the group with arrangements emphasizing restrained improvisation within carefully controlled counterpoint. It was "cool jazz," or jazz "chamber music," at its best--capable of pleasing the non-musical members of the audience and the "long-hairs" along with those hipsters who had followed the group's development from the late '40s when Kenny "Klook" Clarke served as its first drummer.



Within that composed and controlled, classic framework, the frequent explosions of Bags, however short, were always a supreme delight--a reminder that the group's outer formality did not come at the expense of its roots in the 12-bar blues or in swing. And no musicians--on any instrument--played the blues as "deep" or could "swing harder" than Milt Jackson. So inevitably the albums under his own leadership--especailly with Coltrane, Wynton Kelly, Cannonball Adderley and even Ray Charles--are worth acquiring. To my mind, Paul Desmond never sounded as engaging away from Brubeck's piano than when he was playing in the quartet--counterbalancing Dave's occasional bombast with his own dry wit and inventive contributions. (Dave disbanded the Quartet at the end of 1965, then regrouped briefly in 1975, when news came of Paul's illness and limited playing days along with Morello's eyesight problems.)



This is an apt title for the most inventive bluesman in the history of an American art form--jazz. I have yet to receive my copy, but if the sound on this European important is better than most recordings dubbed from an LP, I'll leave the 5-star rating untouched.