The Denver Broncos' offense got some good news on Friday in advance of their meeting with the Miami Dolphins on Sunday.

The team's official website reported that both tight end Julius Thomas (ankle) and wide receiver Emmanuel Sanders (concussion) were at practice.

Sanders practiced fully and is listed as probable to play. Coach John Fox said the wideout was cleared on Thursday night.

The evolution of the NFL:

Take a look at how the NFL has evolved from its humble roots, and the efforts being made to ensure it continues to grow.





Thomas, who left last week's game early with an ankle injury, was listed as questionable for Sunday. Reporters viewed Thomas participating in individual drills, but he was listed as did not participate in practice. Fox told reporters he could have listed Thomas as limited, but his workload was closer to a DNP designation. NFL Media Insider Ian Rapoport reported Sunday morning that Thomas is a game-time decision.

Getting both players back at practice is a good sign for an offense that looked lost at times last week without them. With a sluggish running game, Manning will need as many weapons as possible against a stellar Dolphins defense.

Here's who else is on the mend for Friday:

1. Browns tight end Jordan Cameron returned to practice Friday after missing the last three games. However, per the NFL's concussion protocol, graduating to practice doesn't necessarily mean that Cameron has been cleared for contact or game action. As such, he has been ruled out for Sunday's bout with the Atlanta Falcons.

Inhibited by a season-long shoulder injury in addition to the concussion issues, Cameron has been limited to just 250 yards on 13 receptions in six games. It has been a trying follow-up season to last year's impressive breakout campaign.

Linebacker Karlos Dansby (knee) is doubtful, while pass rusher Jabaal Sheard (foot) is questionable.

2. The Texans announced that running back Arian Foster (groin) is questionable for Sunday.

3. Lions running back Reggie Bush (ankle) has also been designated as questionable.

4. For the Bucs, linebacker Lavonte David (hamstring) was not at practice and will be a game-time decision, per coach Lovie Smith. Meanwhile, the Tampa Tribune also reports that running back Charles Sims (ankle) was at full tilt for Friday's session after being limited the day before. Cornerback Alterraun Verner (hamstring) said he's "optimistic" about playing Sunday, according to the Tampa Bay Times.

5. Vikings defensive tackle Sharrif Floyd (knee), offensive tackle Matt Kalil (knee) and running back Matt Asiata (concussion) were not at practice, with the latter declared out for Sunday. Meanwhile, wide receiver Greg Jennings (rib) participated fully and running back Jerick McKinnon (lower back) was limited. Floyd, Kalil and Jennings are questionable, while McKinnon is probable.

6. The Giants held out offensive tackle Justin Pugh (quad), linebacker Jacquian Williams (concussion) and defensive tackle Cullen Jenkins (calf) from practice and subsequently ruled out for Sunday's contest against the Cowboys.

7. Dallas will probably welcome back defensive end Tyrone Crawford (knee), who is probable.

8. Redskins coach Jay Gruden said that offensive tackle Trent Williams (knee/ankle), defensive lineman Chris Baker (sternum) and tight end Jordan Reed (hamstring) missed practice for the third consecutive day. Williams is questionable, while Baker and Reed were ruled out.

Offensive lineman Shawn Lauvao was present at the session, but still needs to clear the league's concussion protocol -- he's questionable for Sunday.

9. Tight end Delanie Walker (concussion) is probable for the Titans' bout Sunday against the Eagles.

10. Linebacker Vontaze Burfict (knee) has been ruled out by the Bengals for Sunday against the Texans, while running back Giovani Bernard (hip), Wallace Gilberry (back), offensive tackle Andre Smith (ankle) and cornerback Terence Newman (knee) are probable. Coach Marvin Lewis told the team's official website that there's a chance tight end Tyler Eifert (elbow) could return before season's end.

11. Cardinals wide receiver Larry Fitzgerald (knee) was "working on the side" and did not participate in practice. Coach Bruce Arians later said that Fitzgerald is questionable for Sunday's pivotal matchup with the Seahawks and will be a game-time decision.

12. Seahawks coach Pete Carroll said Bobby Wagner (toe) will play Sunday against the Cardinals -- the linebacker is probable. Guard James Carpenter (ankle) will be a game-time decision and is officially questionable.

13. For the Packers, linebacker Clay Matthews (groin) and defensive end Datone Jones (ankle) were limited. Matthews is probable for Sunday, while Jones is questionable.

14. Dolphins cornerback Cortland Finnegan (ankle) and tight end Charles Clay (knee/hamstring) stayed away from practice again, both earning doubtful tags for the Broncos tilt.

Starting running back Lamar Miller and guard Daryn Colledge are both questionable with knee/shoulder and back ailments, respectively.

Quarterback Ryan Tannehill (left shoulder) and wide receiver Mike Wallace (calf) limited but are both probable.

15. Bears wide receiver Brandon Marshall was limited for the second consecutive day with an ankle injury but is probable for Sunday versus the Buccaneers.

16. The Colts announced that tight end Dwayne Allen (ankle), offensive tackle Gosder Cherilus (shoulder) and cornerback Greg Toler (concussion) missed practice for the third straight day and will be out for Sunday.

17. Rams coach Jeff Fisher said that "there's a chance" that defensive end Chris Long (ankle) could be activated for Sunday's matchup with the Chargers, but that "it's probably unlikely," suggesting that next week might be more realistic.

Pass-catching tight end Jared Cook is questionable with a back injury.

18. The Chargers listed quarterback Philip Rivers as probable with a chest injury, while safety Jahleel Addae (concussion) and center Rich Ohrnberger (ankle/back) questionable

19. Niners offensive tackle Anthony Davis (concussion) and defensive tackle Glenn Dorsey (forearm) are out for Sunday, while cornerback Tramaine Brock (hamstring) is questionable and rookie linebacker Chris Borland (shoulder) is probable.

20. The Broncos added DeMarcus Ware to the injury report on Saturday, listing him as probable with an undisclosed illness.

21. The Saints will be without running back Khiry Robinson (forearm), who was declared out for Monday's game against the Ravens. Wide receiver Robert Meachem (ankle) was listed as questionable, while running back Pierre Thomas (rib/shoulder), linebacker Curtis Lofton (ankle) and cornerback Keenan Lewis (knee) were listed as probable.

22. The Buffalo Bills officially listed running back Fred Jackson (groin) and cornerback Ron Brooks (groin) as questionable for Monday's game against the New York Jets in Detroit.

The latest Around The NFL Podcast recaps the Raiders' shocking win over the Chiefs and previews every other Week 12 game. Find more Around The NFL content on NFL NOW.