Q&A with global water entrepreneur Ralph Petroff reveals a unique backstory for this TecHome professional.

The son of a bona fide NASA rocket scientist has turned two startups into worldwide market leaders.

Now, as executive chairman of US-Australian water/energy startup Nexus eWater, Petroff is passionate about addressing the world’s drought crises head on.

Here is a Q&A from a recent conversation.

TecHome Builder: Tell us about your background.

I was born in Canada and raised in Vietnam. In 1963, my family moved to Huntsville, Alabama, where my father

was later recruited by Dr. Wernher von Braun to lead his NASA research and development efforts. In 1975, my father,

brothers and I founded ADS Environmental Services, a water monitoring and services company for the water and sewer industry. As CEO, I helped grow ADS to a market leader in 12 countries. In 1995, we sold ADS to Swedish conglomerate Axel Johnson AB.

In 1996, I became CEO at Time Domain, where I helped create the ultra-wideband wireless industry. I was also co-inventor on a patent for an ultra-wideband mobile phone. Returning to my roots in 2007, I was very fortunate to assist Sir Arthur C. Clarke, Buzz Aldrin, Tom Hanks and many others on the U.S. Space and Rocket Center’s Saturn V Restoration Executive Committee and chaired the 50th Anniversary Symposium of America in Space.

THB: When did addressing world drought crises become a central challenge for you?

In 2005 and 2006, I lived in Australia during the Millennial Drought. I watched as Australia’s government invested in conventional solutions such as massive desalinization and toilet-to-tap plants that take 10 years to build. They also explored much more promising decentralized onsite water recycling solutions such as rainwater and graywater harvesting that really involve consumers.

It occurred to me with California’s water crisis that we can look at the successes and mistakes of Australia rather than repeat them. Today, the Californian’s mind is being concentrated wonderfully—no one more than homebuilders who have an essential role to play.

THB: Could you talk about the new water efficiency rating (WER) index being developed by RESNET to complement its HERS index?

HERS is an increasingly important rating, and many folks think it’s more relevant for homebuilding than LEED. Having a comparable WER rating would be huge for water conservation efforts—and for anyone with highly water-efficient systems or strategies.

Our goal is to have the best single WER rating of any water-saving appliance. We have been working closely with RESNET on this and are on their advisory committee.

One of the three WER chairmen, Jacob Atalla of KB Home [also a TecHome Advisory Board member], was the first national builder to put our system in a model home (Lancaster ZeroHouse in February 2014; click here to view a PowerPoint about the project).

Also, Ed Osann, senior policy analyst for the Natural Resources Defense Council, has been a big proponent of NRDC’s 25×25 program, which calls for the end of potable water used for irrigation or toilet flushing by 2025 (all provided instead by NSF 350-certified graywater and rainwater).

Related Article: Saving Money from Going Down the Drain

THB: Tell us about Nexus eWater.

I believe we have a good chance of being the top-rated water device—here’s why: