Advertisement

Donald Trump openly mocked Hillary Clinton about her bout with pneumonia last month by imitating the moment she nearly fainted as she was helped into her car at the 9/11 memorial ceremony in New York.

In an explosive personal charge against his Democratic opponent Trump told his Pennsylvania audience Saturday night that Clinton lacks the physical stamina to be the nation's next president.

'She has been a disaster. But here's a woman, she's supposed to fight all of these things and she can't make it 15 feet to her car,' he said. 'Give me a break'.

As he spoke, he flailed his arms in the air and pulled a face to mock Clinton's stumble.

Trump continued to poke fun at Clinton because of her 'medical episode' with pneumonia last month, which she kept private until she almost collapsed, causing her to miss part of the 9/11 commemorations.

Donald Trump openly mocked Hillary Clinton about her bout with pneumonia last month by mimicking her fainting as she was helped into her car at the 9/11 memorial ceremony in New York

In an explosive personal charge against his Democratic opponent Trump told his Pennsylvania audience Saturday night that Clinton lacks the physical stamina to be the nation's next president

Trump called Clinton a 'disaster' saying that 'she can't make it 15 feet to her car'. As he spoke, he flailed his arms (pictured) in the air and pulled a face to mock Clinton's stumble

'She's home resting right now. She's getting ready for her next speech which is going to be about 15 minutes and it's going to be in about two or three days.'

'Folks, we need stamina, we need energy, we need people that are going to turn deals around,' Trump said.

Trump's behavior triggered a flashback of his rally last November when he mocked New York Times journalist Serge Kovaleski.

The Republican presidential nominee, at the time, was defending his unsubstantiatedassertions that thousands of Muslims were seen in New Jerseycheering the collapse of the Twin Towers.

During the speech, hesingled out the Times investigative reporter for astory he wrote a few days after the attacks while he was then aWashington Post correspondent.

The Republican presidential nominee slackened his jaw and continued to flop his arms around mocking Clinton in front of a cheering audience

Trump continued to mock Clinton because of her 'medical episode' with pneumonia last month, which she kept private until she almost collapsed, causing her to miss part of the 9/11 commemorations. He pretended to walk and stumble on stage during his speech

Last month, as Clinton was leaving the 9/11 memorial ceremony, she had to be helped into a van after suffering from a 'medical episode'

A video showed the Democratic presidential nominee stumbling as she attempted to get into the van

It was later revealed by her doctor that Clinton had pneumonia and was told to rest. That incident sparked many questions about Clinton's health as she continues her run for the White House

Kovaleski, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist, was born with arthrogryposis, and was 'outrageously' mocked by Trump who did an impression of the journalist's physical handicap during his campaign speech.

While not referring to Kovaleski by name in his speech,Trump accused the reporter of backing down from his own story.

'Now, the poor guy - you've got to see this guy. 'Ah, Idon't know what I said. I don't remember,'' Trump said at themicrophone, jerking his arms in front of his body and slurringhis words in a crude impression of the reporter.

During Saturday's rally, Trump also questioned Clinton's loyalty to her husband.

'Hillary Clinton's only loyalty is to her financial contributors and to herself,' Trump told thousands gathered in Manheim, Pennsylvania.

'I don't think she's even loyal to Bill if you want to know the truth... Why should she be, right? Why should she be?'

The extraordinary personal attack was a reference to Bill Clinton's former infidelity, but also prompted some to speculate Trump was suggesting Clinton had cheated on her husband.

Trump's mocking of Clinton triggered an uncomfortable memory of an incident in November 2015 when he mocked New York Times journalist Serge Kovaleski. Trump did an impression (pictured) of the journalist's physical handicap during his campaign speech

Trump points out into the crowd after speaking at Spooky Nook Sports center in Pennsylvania

On Sunday morning, former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani defended Trump, telling CNN: 'After she called him a racist, a misogynist, a xenophobic, I don't know, a schizophrenic, I don't know what else she called him at the end of that debate, I think it's fair game.

'That was a sarcastic remark pointing out that Bill Clinton has quite a past and Hillary Clinton has done quite a job on attacking the people who are victims of Bill Clinton.'

Giuliani targeted the Clintons' marriage during an interview with NBC's 'Meet the Press', but was in turn asked about his past infidelities.

Host Chuck Todd asked whether Giuliani was 'the right person to level this charge' given 'your past, you have your own infidelity charge'.

To which Giuliani, who had an affair, replied: 'Well, everybody does. And I'm a Roman Catholic, and I confess those things to my priest.'

In 1999, Clinton was accused of rape by Juanita Broaddrick who claims he attacked her when she was working as nursing home administrator in Little Rock, Arkansas, in April 1978.

At the time Clinton was campaigning for the Arkansas gubernatorial election.

The woman, who is now 73, claims he forced himself on her while they had coffee in a hotel room. Clinton denied the allegation through lawyers in 1999.

The comments come after Trump told the New York Times about his latest plan of attack against Clinton.

During Saturday's rally, Trump also questioned Clinton's loyalty to her husband. 'Hillary Clinton's only loyalty is to her financial contributors and to herself,' Trump told thousands gathered in Pennsylvania

And Trump just kept the insults coming, addressing once again Clinton's email scandal. 'She should be in prison,' Trump declared

His comments came as he works to sharpen his focus on the economy - and his Democratic opponent's shortcomings - as he treks across the Midwestern battlegrounds that he needs in order to become the 45th president of the US. Trump supporters cheered as he spoke at a rally in Manheim, Pennsylvania, on Saturday night

Trump told the newspaper he is trying to push the former president's past indiscretions into the spotlight in an attempt to disgust female voters and then win them over.

'She's nasty, but I can be nastier than she ever can be,' he said. 'Hillary Clinton was married to the single greatest abuser of women in the history of politics.

'Hillary was an enabler, and she attacked the women who Bill Clinton mistreated afterward.

'I think it's a serious problem for them, and it's something that I'm considering talking about more in the near future.'

And Trump just kept the insults coming, addressing once again Clinton's email scandal. 'She should be in prison,' Trump declared as his supporters chanted: 'Lock her up!'

His comments came as he works to sharpen his focus on the economy - and his Democratic opponent's shortcomings - as he treks across the Midwestern battlegrounds that he needs in order to become the 45th president of the US.

Members of the Amish community wait for Republican presidential candidate Trump to speak

An Amish man leans against a net set up in an arena where the Republican nominee spoke on Saturday

Included in the audience on Saturday night were scores of Amish people, traditionalists who mainly live in Pennsylvania and Ohio.

They were noticeable in the crowd due to their distinct style of clothing, and the large, bushy beards men had.

Those in attendance roared with approval when Trump, reading from a teleprompter, lashed out at an economic system he said was rigged against everyday Americans.

Friends and foes agree he is at his best in those scripted moments.

But Trump's frequent unscripted moments are often drowning them out - diverting attention from his economic message and alienating women and minorities with early voting already underway in some states.