• Vice-president denies any involvement in Rio ticketing scandal • Delaney had been volunteer on Olympic Council of Ireland board

John Delaney has stepped down as vice‑president at the Olympic Council of Ireland. Delaney, who is also the Football Association of Ireland chief executive, made the announcement in a statement on Tuesday night but denied any involvement in the ticketing scandal that rocked the OCI during the Rio Olympic Games.

“Having given the matter careful consideration, I have made the decision to step down as the FAI’s volunteer member of the 13-person OCI committee board, with immediate effect,” Delaney said in a statement posted on the FAI website.

Pat Hickey vows to fight Rio Olympics illegal tickets charges Read more

The former OCI president Pat Hickey, 71, was arrested in Rio during the Games over the alleged illegal sale of tickets. He denies any wrongdoing.

Delaney said in the statement that he “had no role or involvement in the OCI’s handling of ticketing arrangements for the Rio Olympic Games” and that he would cooperate with investigations being conducted into the OCI’s ticketing arrangements in Brazil.

“During my time as a member of the OCI Executive Committee I have always looked to the best interests of the Olympic movement, and in recent months I have worked extensively with the other OCI Committee members to ensure that all proper steps have been taken by the OCI, following the issues that arose in Rio,” Delaney said.

“As part of this, I have fully engaged and cooperated with investigations being carried out by Grant Thornton, who were appointed to review ticketing arrangements and Deloitte, whose brief is to examine governance issues within the OCI.

“I will, of course, also provide all assistance sought by Mr Justice Carroll Moran as part of the Government appointed enquiry. I am fully confident that in due course my position and non-involvement in these matters will be clarified and independently verified on completion of reports carried out by Grant Thornton or Justice Carroll Moran.

“I wish the OCI executive and the Olympic movement, in this country, all the best into the future and I will always follow with interest their sporting achievements.”