ATLANTA, GA - OCTOBER 04: Cecil Shorts III #18 of the Houston Texans runs from Robenson Therezie #27 of the Atlanta Falcons after a catch in the second half at the Georgia Dome on October 4, 2015 in Atlanta, Georgia. (Photo by Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images) (Photo by Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images)





He played 50 games in Jacksonville catching 12 touchdowns and 176 passes wearing the Jaguars uniform, and now Cecil Shorts will step on the field to replicate some of his success for the Texans.

Shorts, who is dealing with a shoulder injury which caused him to miss the Colts game, said he hopes to play against his former team on Sunday. He returned to practice today 10 days after it looked like his season could be over.

Though he will be dealing with whatever lingering effects his shoulder presents, Shorts will also have something else he will have to account for in his upper-body.

“It will be exciting. I’m pretty sure I’ll be, you know, heart going a little bit,” he said as he mimicked a quickened heartbeat on his chest with his hand. “To see older faces that you played the last four years with, I still have a lot of good relationships with those guys so it will be a little bit of emotion.”

Shorts’ return couldn’t come at a better time. Nate Washington didn’t practice and Chandler Worthy was released earlier this week.

Brian Hoyer called Shorts a key component in the offense and Bill O’Brien praised Shorts’ ability to play both inside and outside receiver.

“He knows how to get open,” O’Brien said. “It’s a lot different in the slot than it is on the outside and he was able to learn that in addition to learning our offense.

“He’s done a good job and it’s good to have him back in there.”

If he plays, Shorts hopes to continue to have fond memories in Jacksonville, just this time with his new team.

“I want to win every week, honestly. It would be fun to beat them but I want to win every week.”

As far as friendly rivalries, Shorts is waiting for the weekend to determine if those exist.

“I guess we’ll find out Sunday,” he said with a laugh.

Follow Stoots on Twitter – @Cody_Stoots