Dollinger Properties wants to build a five-story, 197,000-square-foot office building on Dell Avenue, but the Campbell Planning Commission thinks it might be too tall.

The commission reviewed the plan for 1700 Dell Ave. on Oct. 10. According to city staff, the conceptual drawings estimate the building to be 75 feet tall plus 14½ feet for mechanical equipment, for a total height of 89½ feet. This part of the city is zoned for buildings no higher than 45 feet.

The project would also include a five-story parking garage. The property is located west of the Los Gatos Creek Trail and near the town of Los Gatos border.

The city council got a first look at the plan back in July during a study session. It was there that residents and the council criticized the project’s lack of open space, the building’s height, its proximity to the creek and trail, and lack of parking.

Dollinger Properties has three proposals for consideration. The first sets aside a 7,000-square-foot area as open space, which could be a park, according to Scott Athearn, director of marketing and acquisitions for Dollinger Properties.

This open space would be located at the northwestern corner of the property adjacent to Dell Avenue.

A second proposal would place the open space area in the northeastern rear corner of the lot, with access to the trail from the north boundary to the south boundary of the site.

A third proposal, similar to the second, would place the office building in the southwestern corner of the site, and provide more landscape near the parking garage.

But the open space options and building position did not address the building’s height, which resident Maggie Desmond said was a “scorn” to the council’s direction given to Dollinger Properties in July.

“We’re not Sunnyvale, we’re not Cupertino,” said Audrey Kiehtreiber, president of the San Tomas Area Community Coalition neighborhood group. She added that the glass used on the proposed office building could harm the creek’s wildlife, mainly birds. “We want to preserve that old world feel, but we want to come into the modern society. Old crumbly buildings need to be replaced with new successful ones. This one is not it. It’s concrete and glass; it’s cold and unwelcoming, and it lacks any element that ties it to the natural environment that it is next to.”

Athearn, however, told the commission that the need for such a large building is a result of the prospective tenant. Athearn said he could not disclose the tenant’s name.

“They are known in the Bay Area,” Athearn said, noting it is a financial business. “The reason the building is five floors is that we need to get the square footage for them.”

The consensus of the commission was the building was still too large and there was not enough public benefit to allow it near the creek trail.

Throughout the meeting, there was mention made by the commission and residents about the Dell Avenue Area Plan, which would have guided development in the area to attract high-tech businesses. The plan was shelved late last year by the city due to strong opposition from residents in all corners of the community, but mainly in the San Tomas Aquino area.

“I think the (Dell Avenue Area Plan) would have been the perfect kind of temperature tool to move forward,” commissioner Andrew Rivlin said. “Unfortunately, it wasn’t proceeded with, but I think that it does raise the perfect point that we do need some guidance so we don’t get a hodgepodge.”

Dollinger officials said the development company will continue to work with staff. It is unclear if a formal application for this project will be filed with the city.

“Don’t give up on us,” commissioner Michael Rich told Athearn and architect Cliff Chang, adding they could help determine the look of the Dell Avenue area with their project.