Chapter 25.

"Okay, so I think we need to establish some rules." Anna said as she sat on their bed, taking Elsa's hands between hers. It was bed time, but she really wanted to discuss how their relationship was going to be as soon as possible.

"Rules?" Elsa asked confused and slightly worried.

"Yeah, since, you know, it's your first time having a g-g-girlfriend." Anna still had to get used to the term, it all seemed surreal now.

"Okay… what rules?"

"Well, first of all, I think we should take it slow." Anna's libido instantly protested, but she silenced it. "I-I just love you so much and… I couldn't bare losing you. I don't want to ruin our relationship." Her voice broke when she thought of the possibility.

"You won't. I love you too." Elsa assured her with a sweet smile.

"I know." Anna gave her a tiny smile, but she wasn't sure. Yes, Elsa loved her now, but… what if she found someone better in the future? Or what if she discovered she wasn't really into women?

No. I have to think positive. Live in the moment, Anna, because this moment is just perfect.

"But it's also because I don't want to hurt you, or take advantage of you or do something that'd make you uncomfortable." Anna continued. "Are you okay with that? Taking it slow?" Elsa seemed to think about it for a moment and then nodded eagerly. Anna sighed in relief. "Alright, the second rule would be that you can't tell anyone, not even Rapunzel, that we're cousins."

"Why?"

"Because being romantically involved with a close family member is considered wrong." Anna admitted. She was never particularly bothered about incest, and they weren't that close, they were cousins! It could be worse, right? They could be sisters! But still. Better safe than sorry.

"But it's true love!" Elsa exclaimed. "True love is never wrong."

"True. But not all people see that." Anna answered with a sad voice and lowered her gaze. Elsa, however, wouldn't have her new girlfriend sad. She took her face between her hands and lifted it, to then place a tender kiss on her lips. Anna was surprised, and her heart started racing like crazy, her hands became sweaty and a shiver ran through her spin… it was an entirely new sensation, even if she'd kissed a lot of people before. But Elsa was special, and she soon found herself melting at her touch, forgetting about everything else.

The kiss ended way too soon in Anna's opinion.

"Do you feel better now?" Elsa asked giving her a cute smile, that together with the intense blush on her cheeks made her look all the more appealing. Anna ran her tongue through her lower lip unconsciously.

"Yes, but… can you kiss me again?" She asked, and Elsa eagerly complied.

They kept kissing, marveling at the sensation of their closeness and expressing their love for each other through pure physical contact, even if Anna didn't dare to use tongue just yet, but it was enough for them at the moment.

They both fell sleep with smiles on their faces, cradled in each other's arms.

The next day everything was the same as always… and it wasn't. Instead of having a good morning hug, they hugged and kissed for several minutes. Instead of Anna worrying about Elsa discovering her feelings, she showed them freely. Instead of Elsa being confused about her relationship with Anna, she knew they were girlfriends and took any opportunity to kiss the girl she loved. In summary, everything was perfect… that is, until Anna left.

Rapunzel was dying to know all the details, but she knew she couldn't get them from Anna, so she waited until her best friend was gone and then wasted no time making Elsa talk, which was normally a difficult task, but when the redhead had told her not to say anything to the curious brunette, it was almost impossible.

Nevertheless, Rapunzel tried.

First, she made Elsa sit at a table in front of her and watched her intensely, hoping this would intimidate her and she'd start talking. When Elsa was nervous enough, she started with the questions.

"So… I understand that my plan worked. Correct?" Elsa only smiled and blushed, but remained silent. It still was enough for Rapunzel to know she was right. "That's wonderful!" She exclaimed and jumped over Elsa, pulling her for a tight embrace. "I'm so happy for you two." She broke the embrace and showed her the most sincere of smiles, and Elsa couldn't help smiling back.

"T-thanks." The blonde said. "For helping me."

"It was nothing, really." She answered. "I knew you both really needed it." She paused and pushed back her hair. "But tell me, how was it? I arrived after all the fun stuff had passed and you were just about to cut the cake."

Elsa looked to the left and sighed. She really wanted to tell Rapunzel, after all, it was thanks to her that it all had happened, but Anna had made her promise not to say a thing to the girl. She hadn't said why though. Maybe she wanted to tell her herself?

"Oh, come on!" Rapunzel whined. "I won't tell Anna you told me."

"Sorry, I promised." Elsa gave her an apologetic smile.

"Please?" Rapunzel bated her eyelids, trying to convince her, but the blonde didn't give in. "Why won't you tell me? What did you two do that can't be said?" Elsa's face instantly became intense crimson at her words, and the painter interpreted this the wrong way. "No! Don't tell me you had sex right after becoming girlfriends!" Elsa looked at her confused and embarrassed, but the brunette kept talking. "Anna was always one to take it fast, but I never imagined… Oh! Was it your first time? Please tell me she didn't screw it up… though for what I heard from high school, she's pretty good with her mou… uh… I mean, you know what? You better tell me what happened before I keep saying things I shouldn't."

"Uhm… okay." Elsa was very flustered because she had imagined herself having sex with Anna, and it had made her arousal grow in seconds, so she decided she should at least tell her what they didn't do, before Rapunzel said something that'd make her imagination go wild and her urgency to get some release made her run to her room. "We didn't have sex…" She started but was quickly interrupted.

"Really?" Rapunzel seemed strangely disappointed. "Then did you make out?"

"Make out?" The blonde gave her an strange look.

"Yeah, you know… kisses, generally very heated kisses…"

"Oh, we kissed." Elsa stated proudly, but soon chastised herself for breaking her promise to Anna.

"Great! Did you use tongue? I seriously doubt Anna has enough self-control to keep it cool. "

"Tongue? No, we just kissed, but on the lips." Again, Elsa had talked without thinking, revealing more about her relationship with Anna. However, she was curious as to what that tongue thing was. "Uhm… how do you use tongue?"

"Uhm…" Now it was Rapunzel's turn to become red. "During the kiss you open your mouth, stick out your tongue and hope the other person grants you entrance to their mouth."

"That's… strange." Elsa made a face of disgust. Her arousal had decreased a little at her words, but not enough apparently, because as strange as it sounded, trying to use tongue with Anna didn't sound that bad.

"I know, but it feels better than it sounds, I promise."

"Okay." Elsa still seemed unconvinced.

"Well, no tongue then." Rapunzel paused to think. "Didn't she at least kiss your neck? Or caressed your body? The waist, for example, or a little lower, or…"

Rapunzel's next words weren't registered on Elsa's head, since the blonde started imagining herself with Anna in bed, kissing like in the morning, but with a primal urgency, even using tongues, touching each other… Anna's hand going under her shirt and caressing her waist, only to then move upwards, gripping her breast and massaging it just as she pressed her lips on her neck, making Elsa moan…

Suddenly Elsa got up. She couldn't resist anymore; since the day before when she'd kissed Anna, she'd got turned on every time she thought about the feeling of her lips on hers… and Rapunzel's interrogation only made it worse. It had given her ideas.

The blonde ran upstairs and got in her room, almost instantly unzipping her jeans before getting on bed and shoving her hand down her panties, pleasuring herself as she thought of her new girlfriend.

Rapunzel remained at the table for a couple of seconds wondering what had just happened with Elsa, before getting up and following her upstairs, just not at the same speed the other girl had gone. She supposed she had run to the bathroom, and so she checked there first, but it was empty, so she returned to the guest room and knocked at the door.

"Elsa? What happened? Are you okay?" She asked worried, but got no answer. "Elsa? I'm sorry if I said something to make you uncomfortable, I was just messing with you. Please forgive me?" Again, nothing… but after a moment of silence, Rapunzel heard a strange sound come from the room and wasted no time opening the door worrying something might had happened to Elsa… the sight that greeted her was one she could never forget.

Elsa was lying on the bed, clearly masturbating, but that's not what impressed Rapunzel.

There was ice spreading from the bed and snow flying in circles around it. Ice and snow in the middle of summer, in the warmest state of Arendelle.

Rapunzel would've fainted if she hadn't stabilized herself with the door, which closed loudly behind her making Elsa stop her self-pleasuring season to look at her with wide eyes.

The blonde wanted to disappear, and it had nothing to do with the fact that she had just been caught masturbating. Rapunzel had seen her magic, only because she wasn't careful enough to lock the door… but in her defense, she didn't know her powers went out of control when she took care of her primal needs. Still, she should've locked the door.

Elsa looked at her new friend's face, which she had interpreted as a horrified expression, and wanted to break down crying. She didn't know what'd happen now, but she knew it wouldn't be good for her. Probably Rapunzel wouldn't want to be her friend anymore, would kick her and Anna out of her house and they'd be in danger because Weaseltown was looking for them. All because she was incapable of keeping her damn curse in.

Elsa wanted to run, but Rapunzel was blocking the only way out and jumping out of the window was out of question being in the first floor, so she did the only other think she could; cry, letting out all the fear and pain she felt in the shape of tears. Torrents of tears.

At this, Rapunzel finally reacted; she rushed to Elsa's side, ignoring the ice promptly spreading from the girl's hands, and hugged her. She, of course, tensed at the contact at first, but then she relaxed since she really needed comfort. Besides, if Rapunzel was hugging her, she surely didn't think she was a monster, right?

After a few minutes, Elsa was finally able to somewhat calm down. That's when the brunette released her and finally spoke.

"Do you feel better now?" She asked with a gentle but concerned gaze. Elsa nodded. "Okay, I'm just gonna go get you a tissue and put on a sweater. It's really cold here." She shivered and got up, to then ran out of the room. Elsa briefly considered closing the door and locking herself in until Anna arrived, but she decided that'd make things worse. Besides, Rapunzel was a good person, so she surely wouldn't hurt her… or at least she hoped so.

The brunette returned a minute later wrapped in a thick jacket and holding a box of Kleenex, sat at Elsa's side and handed her the tissues. Then, she waited until the girl had blown her nose and cleaned her tears before speaking.

"So… have you always had this magic?" She asked tentatively. Elsa nodded.

"It was the reason my parents locked me."

"Wait… Your parents? Anna's relatives?" Too late Elsa realized she had just revealed that they were cousins, but Rapunzel noticed her distressed expression and quickly reassured her. "It doesn't bother me, really, I just wanted to know." Elsa sighed in relief; the last thing she wanted was to lose a friend, not because of her unnatural powers, but her incestuous feelings. "And your magic doesn't bother me either. Just so you know."

"Thanks." She said. "For not freaking out."

"That's okay, I know the feeling. Eugene almost had a heart attack when he first witnessed my powers." She smirked. Elsa's eyes opened wide.

"You have powers too?!" She screamed. Rapunzel nodded and Elsa's jaw fell to the ground. She'd never before met someone with magic.

"Not as notorious or impressive as yours, but yes." She answered nonchalantly. "My tears have healing properties. I first discovered it when I was a kid; my dog Maximus broke a leg and I cried over him. He instantly recovered, it was a really nice surprise." One could see she was very proud of her magic. However, Elsa didn't react as she expected.

"You have healing powers?!" She exclaimed with a distressed expressioYou can't tell anyone! Don't ever heal someone again if you don't know them! If Weaseltown found you…

"Relax, if he does I'll just hit him in the face with a frying pan." She joked.

"I'm serious." Elsa said taking her by the shoulders, desperate to make her understand. "You can't let him find you. You're the one he's been looking for."

"Wha…what do you mean?" She asked, finally beginning to understand that maybe Elsa's panic was justified.

"I…" Elsa swallowed. She wanted to tell Rapunzel what she was talking about, but that would mean reminiscing her traumatic childhood without Anna's help, and that'd certainly make Rapunzel's house a huge ice-cube.—I-I'm sorry, I can't tell you right now. I need Anna.

"Anna?" The brunette didn't understand what her friend had to do with it.

"She helps me control my powers." She explained. "Can we please wait until she's back? I promise I will explain everything to you then."

"Okay…" Rapunzel looked confused but decided not to ask questions. "Uh, do you want to watch a movie meanwhile?" Elsa nodded. "Alright, can you thaw the ice?" Elsa nodded again and did just that. It took a lot more concentration than usual, but she eventually did it. "Wonderful." A smile appeared on Rapunzel's lips. "Come on, let's go downstairs."

By the time Anna returned, Elsa and Rapunzel had just finished watching the whole Maleficent movie, even if neither girl had paid any attention to it, Rapunzel being consumed by curiosity and Elsa by shame for not being strong enough to tell her what she had to tell her without freaking out. So it was a relief when the door opened and Anna came through it.

"Hi." She said in her zombie-like state. Elsa instantly got up and rushed to her side, catching her just before she tripped with the carpet and fell. Anna smiled and looked briefly at Elsa's eyes before placing a brief kiss on her lips. This simple action instantly made both girls feel way better.

"H-how was your class?" Elsa asked, not wanting to get straight into the topic of Rapunzel discovering her magic.

"It was fine…" Anna would've fell into the ground if she hadn't been supporting a great part of her weight on Elsa. "Uh… can we sit? I'm really exhausted." Her eyes were almost closing.

"Yeah, sure." Elsa answered and led her to the couch, where she placed her between herself and Rapunzel.

"So… how was your day? Something interesting happened?" She asked, clearly making a great effort to stay awake.

"I found out about Elsa's magic." Rapunzel blurted out, wanting to know already what Elsa was going to say. Instantly Anna's eyes became the size of plates.

"You what?!" She screamed, suddenly completely awake, before turning to look at Elsa for confirmation. A nod from her part was enough to tell Anna what Punz had said was true.

"Don't worry, I was totally fine with it because… uh…" Rapunzel looked to the side ashamed for not having told to her best friend that she had powers before.

"She has powers too." Elsa said for her, but her expression wasn't a happy one. "Healing powers."

"What?!" Now that was something Anna wouldn't have imagined in her wildest fantasies. However, more than surprised, she was indignant. "Why didn't you tell me before?!"

"I did, but you thought it was a joke." Rapunzel tried to defend herself.

Anna tried to remember her best friend telling her something as shocking as that, but it was very difficult. She had an idea of when it was, but…

"We were drunk, right?" She said and Rapunzel gave her a guilty smile.

"Yeah…"

"Ugh, of course I didn't believe you!"

"I'm sorry, I just…"

"You know what? I gonna do something life-changing, and then I'll throw a party and when you're drunk I'm gonna…"

"You've already done something life changing: becoming Elsa's girlfriend." Rapunzel interrupted her. "And you told her not to tell me anything just because you knew I would be dying to hear it all, so I think we're even. Besides, as much as I'd like to hear your revenge plans, Elsa has something more interesting to tell me and she hasn't because she said she couldn't until you were here because it's about Weaseltown, so please stay quiet until she's finished, alright?" At this, Anna shut her mouth. If it was about Weselton, she'd better hear it right away. "Thanks." Her friend said once she noticed the girl had left her tantrum for later. "Now, please tell me that important thing, Elsa." She said now looking at said girl. Elsa swallowed before clutching tightly to Anna's arm and starting her explanation.

"Okay… uh… the first thing you should know is that… ice powers are not the only powers I have."

"What?!" Both girls exclaimed rather loudly and Elsa gave them a look that clearly said 'Don't interrupt me'. Both understood the message and kept quiet.

"Well… actually they are now, but it's not always been that way." She explained. "I had healing powers, but unlike Rapunzel's, they couldn't heal other people; they only served to heal myself, and also made the pain more bearable." She paused. This was the difficult part. "But as my ice powers got stronger, my healing powers decreased, until they completely disappeared… t-that's partially why Weaseltown was so desperate to get rid of my ice magic, not only because he thought it was a curse." She continued, a few tears appearing in her eyes. "He didn't want the healing magic to fade away so he could later figure out how to use it for… whatever reason he had."

"That's also why he tortured you, isn't it?" Anna asked with a saddened expression. "To witness how your healing magic worked." Elsa nodded and then continued, trying not to cry or turn Anna into an ice statue.

"That's why he can't find Rapunzel. I don't know why he wants healing magic so desperately, but it can't be anything good."

"Maybe he wants it to, I don't know, heal?" Rapunzel suggested. "I mean, he's a doctor, right?"

"Yes, but even if that's his purpose, you can't let him find you; he won't treat you nicely." Elsa warned her. "In his eyes, everyone who possess magic is a monster."

The serious way Elsa said this actually made Rapunzel shiver unconsciously, and she felt real fear for the first time, but she was still confident he'd never find her; after all, her magic wasn't as spectacular as Elsa's, and it couldn't get out of control. She'd just have to act like a normal person and everything would be OK. Or so she hoped.

"A-alright." Rapunzel said. "I'll be more careful from now on." Then she nervously got up. "I'll go call Eugene… I forgot to tell him something." And she rushed out of the room.

Anna turned to Elsa, who still seemed to be thinking about her traumatic experiences.

"Are you okay?" She asked. Elsa shook her head and closed her eyes, letting fall two tears. "Oh, Elsa." She said hugging her tightly. "I'm sorry you had to go through all those painful things." Anna closed her eyes, just hoping she could erase the girl's memories. "I-is there something I can do to make you feel better?" She tentatively asked.

Elsa separated herself from Anna and looked up to the gentle, yet concerned eyes of the girl she was in love with. She wiped her nose with the back of her hand and gave her a tiny smile, knowing exactly what she needed in that moment.

"Kiss me?" She asked. Anna smiled and leaned in, capturing her lips in one of the most amazing kisses the blonde had experimented so far. This time, the kiss wasn't one of lust, but it still had passion and love, so much, that it was almost instantly able to erase all negative thoughts from Elsa's mind.

As she closed her eyes and kissed the redhead back, Elsa thought she could never get enough of this.