After nearly reacquiring Carlos Gomez just over a year ago, the Mets may have another opportunity to bring the outfielder back to New York.

The two-time All-Star, who had been set to be traded to the Mets for Wilmer Flores and Zack Wheeler last July before the deal was nixed over concerns about Gomez’s hip, was designated for assignment by the Astros on Wednesday, likely making him a free agent if Houston is unable to trade him in 10 days.

Gomez is making $9 million this season, but can be signed for the league minimum if he clears waivers.

Gomez, 30, started his career with the Mets in 2007 and was dealt before the 2008 season as part of the trade that acquired Johan Santana from the Twins. Last year, when Gomez thought he was heading back to Queens, he described himself as “pumped and excited.”

With the price tag far lower than last season, would the Mets consider adding his right-handed bat to the struggling lineup?

“We always have an open mind,” general manager Sandy Alderson told The Post before the Mets’ 3-2, 12-inning loss to the Diamondbacks at Citi Field.

Gomez’s two best seasons came in 2013-14 in Milwaukee, but his production has sharply declined since the Mets trade collapsed and he was instead sent to Houston. This year, Gomez is hitting .210 with a .594 OPS.

Jose Reyes will begin a rehab assignment Thursday night with the Single-A Cyclones in Brooklyn, where he is expected to play three games.

Reyes, who has been out since July 26 with an oblique strain, will begin the stint two days later than the Mets had planned due to pain he’s experienced while swinging from the right side. According to Terry Collins, Reyes is scheduled to start at third base on Thursday and slide over to shortstop the next night.

With Asdrubal Cabrera’s strained knee tendon healing more slowly than expected, Reyes likely is going to return to his natural position at shortstop, where the 33-year-old has played nearly his entire career until starting his second stint with the Mets on July 5.

With a no-decision, Bartolo Colon failed to become the 18th pitcher in major league history to defeat all 30 teams.

The Mets have homered in 10 consecutive games. … Neil Walker went 2-for-5 and is batting .483 over his past 14 games. … The Diamondbacks have stolen nine bases in the past two games, setting a franchise record for steals in a three-game series. … Lucas Duda was moved to the 60-day disabled list to make room for T.J. Rivera on the 40-man roster.