Jeff Goldblum Opens Up About ‘Thor: Ragnarok’

Jeff Goldblum is getting ready to defend the world once again from an alien invasion in Independence Day: Resurgence but soon after that, Goldblum will start work on the upcoming Thor: Ragnarok.

During an interview with Empire Magazine, Goldblum talked about working within the Marvel Cinematic Universe and his role as the Grandmaster.

“He’s a hedonist, a pleasure-seeker. He’s an enjoyer of life and tastes and smells. I thought, ‘I can do that, I’ll bet!’ I’m working on my part every day. I’m a sponge, researching. [Taika Waititi] is encouraging me to improvise and make it my own, and that’s what I’m trying to do. I hope he doesn’t throw me out on the first day!”

Goldblum also talked about joining such a star-studded and well known cast.

“Not only Chris Hemsworth, Cate Blanchett, Anthony Hopkins… jeez, that’s gonna be fun. I’ve never been to Australia except to do these little publicity things.”

He will only be on set working on the project for three weeks to a month and will be working in Brisbane, Australia. Which is the main location for principal photography. Thor: Ragnarok goes into production right around the 4th of the July.

Goldblum’s co-star Chris Hemsworth was featured on a panel at Wizard World Philadelphia this weekend and also opened up the upcoming Marvel project. Alongside him was his on-screen brother, Tom Hiddleston (Loki).

“Man, it is a lot of fun. I think tonally it’s a big shift in a great way, more than anything we’ve seen before. Um, Taika Waititi, the director, if you know any of his work, yeah, he’s just an incredible sort of comedic talent, um, a lot of heart in everything he does, um, but you know there’s a, it’s a very different Thor, it’s a different Loki, I think there’s a, we go off on another world that we haven’t experienced before. It’s fun you know, uh, but that’s me skirting around the issue because I can’t say too much.”

Alongside Hemsworth and Hiddleston will be Idris Elba, Anthony Hopkins, Cate Blanchett, Tessa Thompson, Karl Urban and Mark Ruffalo as The Hulk.

Source: Empire