THE AFL chief says a racial storm in which an 11-year-old footballer called another player a "nigger" has prompted it to reaffirm its commitment to stamp out racism in all levels of the sport.

Portarlington under 12s player Ronen Jaffari, 11, was allegedly racially abused by another junior player from Drysdale on during a game as part of the Geelong competition on July 2.

The 11-year-old boy accused of the racial abuse during the junior footy game will face a tribunal.

Ronen’s stepmother Lucy told 3AW this morning her son was crying and traumatised when she picked him up after the game.

"He was gutted. He couldn't speak. It just hurts me to even think about it," she said.

"He was red in the face. You know how little kids cry - they breathe in and out. They can't speak.

"He wouldn't hurt anybody or anything. He has got such a kind heart. He's a top kid."

Reacting to the situation today, AFL chief Andrew Demetriou said the league took a harsh view of racism.

"Our view is any form of racial vilification at any level at any age group on any football field - on any sporting field, or even in society - is unacceptable," Mr Demetriou said.

"We've got people in place through our existing means to make sure the appropriate people look at these forms of racial vilification.

"That includes a mediation process to be conducted confidentially."

Football Geelong chief executive Lee Hartman says the player denied making the racial taunt, but said it carried out the AFL's racial training and education with all clubs and players.

"At the end of the day, we're working with two 11-year-old kids here, so it's more about the education process and making sure not only those two but the junior league and the clubs and players understand what's tolerated and what's not.''

The player's appearance on Wednesday night will be the first time the Bellarine Football League tribunal has presided over an under-12 case or with racial vilification claims.

If found guilty he could face suspension.

Ronen's father Ben said he was upset the matter had to go to a tribunal.

"So long as we get an apology and (the other boy) gets some sort of a ban … we're happy to let it go," he said.

He said his son was still distressed.

"He's like a little turtle that has retracted himself inside his shell," he said.

Football and Netball Geelong operations manager Michael Limb said the clubs tried to deal with the incident through mediation, but the victim’s family was unhappy with the outcome.

"There was an alleged vilification," he said.

"Mediation took place but one party was not satisfied.

"We certainly don’t condone vilification of any kind."

The incident is the latest in a string of racial vilification cases that have rocked football at all levels.

Last month, an Aboriginal player from North Bendigo under 15s was racially abused by a spectator during a game against Kangaroo Flat.

The incident sparked an on-field brawl in the third quarter, and the spectator was banned from games.

In the same week, Bulldogs player Justin Sherman was banned for four-weeks from the AFL for racially abusing first-game Gold Coast player Joel Wilkinson.

Earlier in June, a Port Melbourne supporter was ordered to undergo a racial and religious vilification program after he racially abused Kangaroo young gun Majak Daw.

Hawks star Lance Franklin was also racially abused by a spectator during a match in Launceston.

- Alex White, Jay Savage, AAP



Originally published as Boy, 11, racially abused at footy