'Tis the season to write songs about killing Sheriff Joe Arpaio.

This past week I detailed how folk-punkers Andrew Jackson Jihad and other local bands had penned songs for the recent Chronicles of Sheriff Joe record that decries his racist tendencies and invokes murderous notions of offing Maricopa County's top cop.

Turns out they're not the only ones. San Diego indie band Crocodiles posted a song titled "Kill Joe Arpaio" on Soundcloud earlier this month that caught the attention of a few Valley TV stations and news outlets over the past 24 hours.

Continue Reading

Hear what the kafuffle is all about after the break.

Kill Joe Arpaio by scemoburz

The three-and-half-minute track consists of chit-chat from a San Diego-area talk radio station about the nutty Nativist movement and Arizona's anti-immigration policies pasted over a generic-sounding surf/garage rock instrumental by the Crocodiles. And that's pretty much it.

Other than the name of the song, there's absolutely zero mention of murdering Sheriff Joe or doing him any bodily harm whatsoever. Frankly, there were far more incendiary and caustic content on the Chronicles of Sheriff Joe, which the Valley media outlets are apparently unaware of (guess they didn't pick up a copy of this week's issue).

The Crocodile's "Kill Joe Arpaio" track is hardly anything to get excited about, which seems to be the same thought that Arpaio had about the song.

The shurf told KTAR and other radio and TV reporters that the song didn't "overly concern" him and he chalked it up to free speech.

"I'm a little concerned about the music, where kids can get this type of music," Arpaio told KPHO. "I think it sends a bad message. I understand freedom of speech, but there has to be a line of threatening a law enforcement official."

Wonder how he'd feel about the Jihad's song, or any of the other content on Chronicles of Sheriff Joe? We're willing to bet that despite AJJ's Sean Bonnette wailing "I got something to say/I killed Arpaio today," the sheriff would probably be tickled pink by having a song written about him, no matter the content. Even if an artist or band were to describe in explicit detail how they'd help Joe shuffle loose the mortal coil, it would only serve to inflate his ego that much more.