Brazil’s Erotikaland will not, sadly, have naked rollercoasters. (Picture: Tony Sapiano/REX/Shutterstock)

Because rollercoasters are the most fun you can have without taking your clothes off, and sex is, erm, just the most fun, Brazil is finally bringing together two of the greatest joys in life in one glorious place: a sex-themed amusement park.

Planned to open in 2018, Erotikaland will be an adults-only theme park built near Piracicaba (about two hours away from Sao Paolo).

It’s entirely themed around sex. We’re talking a ‘7D’ (we don’t even want to know what that means) cinema with vibrating seats, a nudist pool, and bumper cars shaped like genitalia.

The park will also boast a ‘sex playground’ complete with a water slide, an ambiguously named ‘train of pleasure’, and an erotic sculpture park.

(Picture: Soft Love)

Instead of the usual pretzels and ice creams, snack shacks will serve up aphrodisiac treats.

Advertisement

Advertisement

So all good, clean fun, basically.

But don’t get the wrong idea. Actually having sex in the theme park is strictly prohibited. If all the sex chat and rollercoasters get people too riled up, they’ll need to go to a nearby hotel.

(Picture: Soft Love)

And as silly as the park may sound at first, it does actually have an important message. The investors behind the park say it will promote healthy attitudes to sex, and staff will encourage condom use.

There will also be a museum dedicated to the history of sexuality.

Proposed Erotikaland features: A 7D cinema with vibrating seats

A sex toy shop

A museum dedicated to the history of sexuality

Erotic games

An erotic sculpture park

A nudist swimming pool

A sex playground complete with a water slide

Bumper cars shaped like genitalia

Snack stalls selling aphrodisiac treats

So it’s basically like sex-positive sexual education, in a fun, theme park form. Which we can definitely get behind.

The only slight downside? Entry (into the theme park. Naughty) costs $100 (£69. Ha).

What we imagine the rides will be like.

There’s also a slight risk that backlash from the Christian Socialist Party – which leads the Piracicaba City Council – could put a halt on the theme park being built.

Matheus Erler, a member of the Christian Socialist Party, said he worried that the park would attract ‘debauched individuals’, and that Brazil cannot ‘be known as the capital of sex’.

So we guess he’s not down to visit the horniest place on earth. Sad times.

MORE: Go, go, go! Tickets for the ArcelorMittal Orbit Tower slide are now on sale

Advertisement

Advertisement

MORE: ‘Rollercoaster’ ice cream is a thing and we want it now

MORE: Would you ride the world’s tallest outdoor elevator?

Advertisement Advertisement