Today we’re going to talk about The white Moose Café, a Café shop located in Dublin, Ireland. A shop which I believe has perfected the art of Shitposting. I first came across them on Twitter, after one of my followers re-tweeted a Tweet of theirs making fun of a vegan Feminist. However, even before this whole controversy started, the Café shop’s owner had been religiously Trolling Vegans and social Justice warriors for several years now.

PROFILE OF A SHITLORD

Although voted as the best Café in Ireland in 2016(according to them), The white Moose has gained notoriety in the country for its politically incorrect humor and trollish behavior. The Shop once made the news for telling fans of Ed Sheeran to go stay in a homeless shelter if they didn’t like their prices. That’s not all; the shop at a point in time, also offered a discount to all customers who refused to pay their water bills. According to the promotion, all visitors to the shop who provided proof of not paying their water bills would be given a discount in all their purchases.

In 2014, several fans of a band threatened to burn down the Café after the owner posted false information regarding a concert.

However, the shop doesn’t just keep its Shitposting to real life. Like all professional shitposters, The White Moose makes the Internet its home. Here is a quick summary of some of their shenanigans:

Angry reviewer gets owned

About a year ago, one angry customer decided to write an angry review about the Café on its Facebook page. In response, the Café shop owner went through several hours of security camera footage to find the time period within which she visited the Café shop.

Hilarity ensures.

In the security footage, the woman who claimed to hate the shop could be seen horsing several handfuls of food into her mouth and licking the plate clean.

National Punch a vegan day

Sense of humor Implant procedure

Generally just fucking with people

FAST FORWARD TO TODAY

This brings us to the Vegan-Feminist controversy.

It all begun when the shop owner referred to a vegan Feminist as a “Spawn of Satan” and someone got offended:

The shop responded:

They got blocked:

Someone decided to start the #boycottwhitemoose hashtag on twitter and since it wasn’t getting much attention, the shop owner decided to help out:

But that’s not all. In light of recent events, the Café is now hosting an event entitled ‘Ireland’s Next Top Feminist’. We honestly can’t tell if this one is a joke or not. Guess we’ll have to wait and see.

THE BUTTHURT

As always, we like to end articles like this with a little butthurt. However, as this article is already very long as it is, we’re going to keep this one short.

Someone made a butthurt tweet, the shop got it laminated and it now hangs on their wall.

He wants to travel halfway around the world just to punch their employees

Did I mention that hundreds of people once protested their shop because they imposed an extra tax on breast feeding mothers?(A Joke)

They once made the news because they required doctors’ notes from their Gluten free customers