Casey Hayward remembers the Chargers.

The team he recalls has a quarterback who came into Green Bay last October and threw for a franchise-record 503 yards. It has a wide receiver in Keenan Allen who helped Philip Rivers pick apart man coverage, Allen catching 14 passes for 157 yards in less than three quarters. It has a cornerback in Jason Verrett who quickly has become one of the premier players at his position.

Hayward is joining a 4-12 team.

He doesn't feel like it.

The former Packers cornerback officially signed his three-year, $15.3 million contract Monday. Afterward, he explained the appeal. Some of it was San Diego; he long has considered this among his favorite U.S. cities. Some of it was the push from the front office, showing him he was wanted. Not to be overlooked, Hayward left a team with the pieces in place to be a contender. He believes the Chargers have them, too.

The Packers have a top quarterback in Aaron Rodgers.

So do the Chargers in Rivers, Hayward said.

"Aaron, that's my dude," he said. "He's great. He's one of the best to do it, not just right now but ever to do it. I see him in practice make the craziest throws where I think I'm going to pick the ball off but (he completes it). He'll look and wink at me like, 'I got you,' and I just shake my head, go back to the huddle and mumble something under my breath. ...

"He's unbelievable, but we've got one of those quarterbacks here in Philip. I went against him last year, and he threw for over 500 yards, so I'm pretty sure he's just as special. He doesn't do a lot of winking, but he does a lot of talking. It's real competitive talking. Nothing out of the way. I respect Philip. Hopefully, I can compete against him every day and give him the same challenges I gave A-Rod."

Hayward has respected Allen from afar.

He likened their upcoming practice matchups to his previous experience of facing Packers wide receiver Jordy Nelson.

Likewise, Hayward said that he already considers Verrett one of the game's best corners. Verrett, 24, is set to enter his third NFL season. He is coming off his first career Pro Bowl appearance.

Hayward expects to compete at both outside and nickel cornerback, he said. He is aware that, of the Chargers' 12 losses in 2015, nine were decided by one score. One of those losses came in Green Bay, a 27-20 game in which Rivers led the offense 2 yards from a touchdown in the final minute. Coach Mike McCoy said the next day he planned to call for a two-point conversion had the Chargers scored.

"Now, it just comes down to finishing," Hayward said. "I've been in the playoffs every year I've been here, plus the Super Bowl as well. Hopefully, I can come in here and take the defense to another level not just with my play but as a leader as well."