At least 20 foreign terrorists have used the Human Rights Act to remain in the UK, The Telegraph can disclose.

An analysis of legal cases over the past decade shows up to 28 convicted terrorists and suspects have escaped deportation and were allowed to stay in this country.

In the court cases, lawyers – typically funded through legal aid – used the Human Rights Act to prevent clients being sent overseas.

It is understood the terrorists remain under surveillance at huge cost to the public purse while also stretching manpower.

The problem of deporting terrorists has prompted calls from senior Conservatives, led by Chris Grayling, the Justice Secretary, for the Human Rights Act to be scrapped and replaced by a stricter Bill of Rights.

In January, The Telegraph revealed how a terrorist fundraiser with links to the al-Qaeda gang that murdered 17 innocent people in Paris over a three day killing spree has continued to stay in Britain despite being convicted more than a decade ago.

Baghdad Meziane, 49, a father-of-two, has avoided being sent back to his birth place of Algeria and remains in Leicester, where he ran a network providing fraudulent passports and credit cards for jihadists.

Another terror suspect, it can now be disclosed, has evaded deportation by refusing to reveal his real name in a case that has lasted more than 15 years at a huge cost to the British taxpayer.

The man, believed to be Algerian, cannot be sent back there because Algeria will not accept him without proof of his real identity including his nationality.

The terror suspect – known only as 'B’ – was first arrested in 1998 for his connection to an Algerian terror cell, linked to al-Qaeda, and the British courts declared him a “risk to national security” as long ago as 2008.

But the man has refused to say who he really is and is now on bail, living with his family and allowed to go swimming and attend his local mosque. The case, incredibly, remains ongoing with a further hearing due in the coming months to have all bail restrictions lifted.

The man’s lawyers had argued that it would be an abuse of human rights laws to force him to leave the country, pointing out officials could not draw up crucial paperwork guaranteeing his safety without knowing his true identity.

Two men convicted of aiding and abetting terrorists behind a failed bomb plot in London on July 21 2005 have also evaded deportation using the Human Rights Act.

Siraj Yassin Abdullah Ali, 37, was convicted of aiding and abetting the al-Qaeda cell behind the 21/7 bomb plot that attempted to repeat the atrocity on 7/7 two weeks later, and was jailed for nine years.

Meanwhile Ismail Abdurahman, 30, who hid would-be bomber Hussain Osman for three days, escaped being deported to his native Somalia. Abdurahman was sentenced to eight years. Both were released after serving part of their sentence.

The Ministry of Justice confirmed that both Meziane and suspect 'B’ were legally aided, meaning the UK taxpayer has been funding their lengthy appeals against deportation. It is thought Abdurahman and Ali were also legally aided.

The dossier of foreign terrorists residing in the UK has been compiled by a respected intelligence and security think tank using legal databases and court reports over the past decade as well as other sources.

The Henry Jackson Society said the numbers remaining in the UK presented a huge difficulty to intelligence services.

It has uncovered 28 convicted or suspected terrorists who over the past decade have been allowed to stay in the UK and resist deportation using the Human Rights Act.

The Home Office said it did not keep figures on the numbers of terror suspects allowed to remain here by the courts.

All the terrorists in the Henry Jackson Society dossier are from countries which have poor human rights records – allowing them to claim they would face ill-treatment if sent back home.

Under Article 3 of both the European Convention on Human Rights and the Human Rights Act, individuals are protected against torture and inhuman or degrading treatment.

Robin Simcox, research fellow at the Henry Jackson Society and co-author of Islamist Terrorism: The British Connections, which details terror networks in the UK, said: “At a time when the UK police and security service are overstretched with trying to cope with the homegrown terrorist threat, the fact that we continue to host so many dangerous foreign national terror suspects is deeply troubling.

“Being unable to deport foreign national security threats is an issue that has plagued successive governments. The coalition government has not shown itself able to resolve problems with the legislation that makes this the case any more than its predecessors. This must change – and quickly.”

Mr Grayling said: “It would simply never in a million years have occurred to the authors of the original Convention on Human Rights that it would one day end up in some form being used as a justification to stay here by individuals who are a danger to our country and our way of life.

“I do not believe that we should be in a position where we are hamstrung in a way that makes it more difficult to protect our citizens. We need urgent, wholesale reform of human rights laws in this country to make sure they cannot be twisted to serve the interests of those who would harm our society.”

Harry Fletcher, a criminal justice expert, said: “The risk to the public must be the over-riding priority when determining what happens to suspected or convicted terrorists. The police must have ring-fenced resources to keep suspects monitored.”

A Home Office source said last week that officials were “in the process of removing Meziane”.

A Home Office spokesman said: “We remain committed to pursuing every possible avenue to ensure we can remove foreign nationals who pose a threat to our national security.

"For example, where individuals claim there is a risk to their human rights under Article 3 of the European Convention of Human Rights, we can use Deportation with Assurances to remove people from the UK in line with our existing international obligations.

“The assurances we obtain mean that there are no substantial grounds to believe an individual faces a real risk of treatment that contravenes these human rights in their home country.”