For the better part of the past month I've been organizing the Masters & Apprentices Cup, a 2v2 Tournament where GM players are partnered with Bronze League Players. I'm writing this article to help give some insight into the labor that goes into organizing even a small community level tournament, and to help guide anyone that may be considering organizing their own event. Organizing a tournament is doable even for an unknown, but it's a lot of work, and unlike learning to macro or learning to how to execute a specific timing attack, there aren't a lot of resources that will walk you through the process.

The decision you have to make when putting together a tournament is whether it will be open, or invitational. If you're attempting to have a high level tournament I'd recommend invitational, I used the GM ladder like a phone book.

Double Click, Add Friend, Chat, Repeat... It Got Old Fast

I started at number 1 and worked my way down, sending players a polite copy pasta inviting them to participate in my tournament. I was surprised by the overwhelming amount of positive responses I got, I'd say it took me maybe 40 “cold calls” to assemble 16 GMs that were willing to play, and this was with a relatively meager prize pool of $150. The important lesson here is, if you can muster a small prize pool you can still pull in some terrific talent. If you have ambition in eSports this is an invaluable way to dip your toes in the water and see how it feels.

Once I'd assembled my 16 GM players I assumed that the Bronze players would be easy to recruit, but it turns out I was wrong, and this assumption led me to my first major mistake, announcing too early. Following an announcement, interest in a given tournament will generally follow a bell curve. An announcement is your single biggest asset to garner free hype, but if you fail to provide concrete details within a short window after making your announcement, interest will rapidly fizzle. I was unable to provide concrete details because I had assumed recruiting bronze players would be easy, it was not.

A Decent Gauge of the Scenes Attention Span

This brings me to my next major point, assumptions are the bane of a tournament organizer. Even basic assumptions like “The players that committed to playing will still be interested next week,” trying to keep in touch with so many people that you know only via the internet is incredibly difficult, mass communication is also hard because everyone has their own preferred means of contact. To any aspiring tournament organizers I would highly recommend choosing one form of contact, either Skype or e-mail, and mandating that all tournament players use it. Accommodating people seems all well and good at first, but communication is hands down the messiest part of organizing a community event.

The next step to consider is only relevant if you plan on streaming the matches, but if you do you're faced with a choice. You can either choose to broadcast live or stream from replays. Live broadcasts are considered standard fare in major and premier tournaments, and the appeal is easy to understand. There's a certain thrill that comes with a live broadcast that just seems to be lacking in a replay tournament. It's almost like the difference between watching a live broadcast and a VoD. With that being said replay tournaments are far more feasible for anyone that exists outside the coveted world of full time eSports employment. Replay tournaments allow players to set their own schedules, and the tournament organizer simply sets a deadline where all replays have to be sent in by. In addition to drastically lowering the amount of labor needed for the event organizer, having a replay tournament also makes you more attractive to your potential players. The flexibility of playing when they're able means they won't have to dedicate an enormous amount of time to playing. My tournament contains a couple pro-gamers, and I doubt they would have agreed to participate if they had been required to spend a weekend playing and waiting to play.

On the topic of streaming there's an enormous amount of technical work that needs to be done in advance. For example if you plan on using the gorgeous GameHeart overlay that made waves at ShoutCraft you better ensure that your entire map pool is compatible with it. If there's no GameHeart version of a map in your map pool, then GameHeart simply will not work. You'll be forced to switch UIs mid stream, which will seriously lower the production value of an event, even one at the community level. Additionally it's important to create all of your graphics well in advance, the programs that allow you to stream to Twitch don't function like photoshop. You can't simply drag and drop graphics over your screen, which means that everything has to line up perfectly down to the last pixel.

No matter how ambitious a tournament organizer is, he can't realistically hope to solo cast, observe, and run the event. Which means at the minimum you'll need to recruit an additional caster, spend some time observing replays with him, and try to build a chemistry. Co-Casters feeling each other out for the first time on stream is painful and cringe worthy, don't drive viewers away.

Once you have a full player pool its time to make the bracket, CHALLONGE! is hands down the best bracket organizing program,and best of all its free!

Meet CHALLONGE! Your New Best Friend

Once you've got the brackets generated you'll want to check in with the entirety of your player pool, and give them their opponent's Battle.Net ID and character code. I'd recommend making two brackets, one to post in your upcoming announcement, and another that is given only to players that includes their character codes. This will facilitate easy communication amongst players while still protecting your tournament participants privacy.

At this point you're finally ready to make your announcement. An announcement should serve to advertise the highlights of your event and should also include the following information as concisely as possible: the broadcast schedule, brackets, map pool, format, casters, and finally the prize pool. If you go down that checklist and find that more than one item is TBA then you are not ready to make your announcement, if you post right now you'll be banking heavily on the assumption that things will work out, when in fact things tend not to work out the way. If you announce and are then forced to delay you'll be shooting yourself in the foot. As mentioned earlier if your tournament can't quickly move from announcement to materialization then interest will peak long before you're ready to stream the first match. The volatility of Reddit is truly a double-edged sword for the event organizer.

Your actual announcement should be three pronged; first create a complete announcement under the TeamLiquid tournaments forum, then create a link on Reddit, and finally organize a Twitter blast that you can hopefully recruit some friends into. Tweets should link back to the Reddit, because it gives the reader a chance to upvote, and it gives him a chance to be engaged in the more casual environment of Reddit comments versus the elitist TeamLiquid forums. A proper announcement can quickly snowball you to the top of Reddit, if only for a day. With the right hook you might hit the critical mass needed to have a 1k+ stream, but even if you don't hit a massively impressive number, keep in mind that you've accomplished what very few others have. If you bring a tournament from inception to the finals then you have without a doubt wholly succeeded!

Organizing a tiny tournament is an exhausting affair, and it was an enlightening experience that really made me appreciate what figures like TotalBiscuit do for the Starcraft Scene. Despite all the work and pitfalls I mentioned, organizing a tournament is totally doable. Even accounting for the all the frustrations you're likely to encounter, organizing an event is a highly rewarding experience, and is hands down the best way average Joes can give back to the scene, and the community.

Masters Apprentices Cup will be broadcasted at 5:30EST at twitch.tv/ploguidice. Keep up with me @ploguidic3.