By , 1

Researchers at the University of Washington (UW) have demonstrated electroluminescence in a flexible, mechanically strong construct of the semiconductor tungsten selenide only three atoms thick.

The researchers harvested single sheets of tungsten selenide (WSe 2 ) using adhesive tape, a technique invented for the production of graphene. They used a support and dielectric layer of boron nitride on a base of silicon dioxide on silicon, to come up with the thinnest possible LED.

Diagram showing the layers of the almost two-dimensional LED.

The LEDs now used in most consumer electronics are rigid and are hundreds to thousands of times as thick as the material being developed at UW -- which the team characterizes as 1/10,000th the thickness of a human hair.

Existing inorganic LEDs are not appropriate for use in bendable, foldable applications such as electronic devices and displays integrated into clothing. Organic light-emitting diodes are the usual candidates for such applications, but the techniques being pioneered at UW can produce devices that are not only much thinner -- and stackable -- but also far more versatile.

Versatility

"This system has the required ingredients for new types of optoelectronic device, such as spin- and valley-polarized light-emitting diodes, on-chip lasers, and two-dimensional electro-optic modulators," the team writes in the March 9 issue of Nature Nanotechnology (subscription required). "Our work makes it possible to make highly integrated and energy-efficient devices in areas such as lighting, optical communication, and nano lasers," UW said in a press release.

It is not clear whether this early research will lead to processes usable in applications such as general or automotive lighting, where high-power devices based on gallium nitride are established and rapidly evolving according to Haitz's Law, the solid-state lighting equivalent of Moore's Law. But the possibilities the research opens up for rapid, energy-efficient optical communications at the nano scale are tantalizing.

The Nature Nanotechnology article is behind a paywall, but the research team has posted a preprint on the arXiv site.

Other teams at work

Teams from MIT and the Vienna University of Technology also published work on WSe 2 in the same issue of Nature Nanotechnology. The MIT researchers concentrated on the LED potential of the material, as UW did, while Vienna explored using WSe 2 in photovoltaic applications. The material is transparent, leading to speculation about solar cells embedded in window glass.

— Keith Dawson , Editor-in-Chief, All LED Lighting