LOMA LINDA >> When 6-year-old Logan Bullock left his room at the Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital Tuesday, he got to meet one of his favorite superheroes — Spider-man.

Logan and other young patients at the hospital spent a couple hours Tuesday afternoon visiting with movie characters, playing games and interacting with local organizations and businesses during the Luke’s Pride Community day.

“We’re glad he gets to come down here,” said Logan’s mother, Cheri Lebrun, of Running Springs.

Luke’s Pride Community day is a fair-type patient diversionary event, allowing the children to get out of their hospital rooms and just have a good time.

Mikey Garcia, a professional boxer; Martand Bhagavatula, a violinist; representatives and mascots from Fiesta Village, Golden Heart Books, Ayres Hotels, Arrowhead Credit Union’s Arrowheart Foundation, Ashley Furniture, Auto Club Speedway and Toys R Us participated in the event. Members of the 501st Legion Star Wars also visited with the children and their families.

“It’s a fun time for the kids to come down from the units and have a good time,” said Joanna DeLeon, director of the Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital Foundation. “It’s nice for the parents to see their kids having a good time.”

The hospital and its Child Life Department try to hold these type of events two to three times a year, giving not only the children patients an opportunity to have some fun, but their siblings and families as well, DeLeon said.

“Our Child Life team works really hard to make sure we’re meeting the social and emotional needs of the kids,” DeLeon said. “It’s a really unique program.”

Angelina Castleberry understands. Castleberry founded Made For a Miracle, which offers support and care packages to parents of children in the neonatal intensive care unit, after her twins spent time there. Her son, who is now 2, receives dialysis at the hospital four days a week.

“It just means so much to have that extra person there to talk to, to vent with and to be with them and let them know you’re not alone and give encouragement and hope,” Castleberry said. “And days like today, where we just have that fun and bring that light to them.”

She participated in Tuesday’s event, speaking with families and the children.

“It’s been so much fun seeing all the children and just being able to give them the coloring books and the toys,” Castleberry said. “It’s just one day when we get that one moment when we know they’re having fun and just see the smiles on their faces. It makes it all amazing. It’s an incredible time.”

Candace Ransom, founder of Medals of Courage, gave the children medals won and donated by marathoners. She founded her organization after her 19-year-old son was killed in a great white shark attack. The two would train and run in marathons together. After his last race, a couple months before his death, he shared his medal with a child.

Ransom was inspired to continue his kind deed after his death. She has since been sharing medals with children at Loma Linda and other hospitals.

“They’re meant to bring encouragement to them and bring a smile and let them know hundreds of runners are cheering them on,” Ransom said. “That’s what it’s really about.”