The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) invades the immune system and destroys certain types of white blood cells, and if the retrovirus is not treated, a person will develop acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) in 10 to 15 years. AIDS is the final stage of an HIV infection, and it often results in death. Everyone with a television or wifi connection knows that Charlie Sheen is HIV positive, but many people do not know that cannabis can likely help most HIV patients.

In terms of directly fighting the virus, some studies suggest that cannabis may inhibits the spread of HIV. For example, Biochemical Pharmacology in 2008 identified elements in sativa strains that could serve as “lead compounds for the development of an alternative therapeutic approach against AIDS,” while a 2014 study in AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses specifically claimed that the plant might stop the spread of the disease. Regarding the 2014 study, the lead author wrote, “These findings reveal novel mechanisms that may potentially contribute to cannabinoid-mediated disease modulation.”

To be clear, these studies do not claim that cannabis is a cure, but rather, the findings demo nstrate that there is real therapeutic potential that demands large-scale research. What is more certain, however, is that cannabis can clearly help mediate the symptoms of HIV and the traditional drugs taken for it.

A critical issue for HIV/AIDS patients is pain management. The Neurology journal in 2007 argued, “Smoked cannabis was well tolerated and effectively relieved chronic neuropathic pain from HIV-associated sensory neuropathy… comparable to oral drugs used for chronic neuropathic pain,” while the American Journal of Hospice & Palliative Medicine in 2014 went so far as to suggest that “cannabis is a safer alternative [than opioids] for palliative care.” Nausea and appetite are also critical issues, and the Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes in 2007 found that “for HIV-positive marijuana smokers… [the plant was] well tolerated and produced substantial and comparable increases in food intake.” Likewise, cannabis can potentially reduce the symptoms from HIV/AIDS drugs, and a 2005 study in the same journal found that cannabis-consuming patients are 3.3 times more likely to adhere to the antiretroviral therapy regimens.

In 2005, the Journal of Pain and Symptom Management explored symptom management via cannabis, and nearly one-third of the patients reported using cannabis in this way. Per the findings, “[These] patients reported improved appetite (97%), muscle pain (94%), nausea (93%), anxiety (93%), nerve pain (90%), depression (86%) and paresthesia (85%).” HIV/AIDS patients tend to be very familiar with the suggested benefits of cannabis, and a similar study published in the AIDS Care journal in 2007 found that 60 percent of patients self-identify as medical cannabis patients.

Cannabis might play a larger role in HIV/AIDS treatment based on future findings, and at present, it should be utilized a complement (not a replacement) to traditional approaches. Nevertheless, clinical research suggests that the medicinal benefits of cannabis could be substantial.

LIFE images by Ron English. David Jenison (david@prohbtd.com) is Editor-in-Chief at PRØHBTD.