Pat Cashman (born September 16, 1949) is an American comedian and television and radio personality, based in the Seattle metropolitan area.

Biography [ edit ]

Born and raised in Bend, Oregon, Cashman graduated from Bend High School in 1968[1] and majored in journalism and communications at the University of Portland.[2] After graduation, he worked in radio in Bend, Ontario, and Eugene then switched to television, where he made local commercials at KEZI. He later went to KTVB in Boise, Idaho, where he was production director and originated "Peculiar Playhouse," a local comedy show aired after Saturday Night Live.[2]

Cashman moved to KING-TV in Seattle in 1980, where he again worked in making local commercials, including spots for the Seattle Mariners baseball team.[2] He was a regular cast member of the long-running local comedy show Almost Live! as well as the announcer for Bill Nye the Science Guy. On radio, he has hosted the Pat Cashman Show, a morning drive-time show on several Seattle stations, and his familiar bassy voice is heard in local commercials. Among the local commercials he voices are the commercials for Jerry's Hardware in Eugene and Springfield, Oregon. His most recent voice work was for the Wii video game Super Smash Bros. Brawl as the game's announcer, Master Hand, and Crazy Hand.[3]

Cashman also writes for several local newspapers in the Seattle region. He generally presents his comical view on a wide variety of subjects in a single article. Cashman has also been in many advertisements for Taco Time. He has most recently appeared in Visioneers (2009) as a telethon host.

In January 2013, Cashman returned to Seattle TV with a new regional comedy show called The 206, along with his son Chris and former Almost Live! costar John Keister. Keister subsequently left the show in 2014. In 2015, a revamped version of the show, Up Late Northwest, began airing in other markets as well as Seattle (Portland, Spokane, Eugene and Medford). The program is hosted by both Pat and Chris Cashman. [4][5]

Videos [ edit ]

YouTube – Popular Pat Cashman & Almost Live! videos

videos YouTube – Almost Live Pat Cashman