

The Bangles performing at the House of Blues (Photo by current events via the LAist Featured Photos pool on Flickr)

Parts of the Sunset Strip will be getting a major facelift over the next few years. After it was announced last week that the original Hustler store will be shutting down to possibly make way for a new luxury hotel in West Hollywood, it looks like the House of Blues will also be on its way out.

Bloomberg reported today that the landmark music venue, which has been open since 1994 and has had the likes of Prince and Bruce Springsteen perform on its stage, will get torn down. AECOM and Combined Properties Inc. are planning on building a massive mixed-use development with 149 hotel rooms, 40 condos and an entertainment venue where the House of Blues now sits. Construction will launch at the end of 2015, although it's not clear yet when the House of Blues will close and if they'll be moving to a new location. The developers are estimating it will take about 2.5 years to complete construction.

"The clubs have gone up and down in interest, and with it the interest in the Strip,” said John Keho, assistant director at West Hollywood’s Community Development Department. “The Strip has always been an entertainment area. Today, all the new hotels will help attract a higher-profile entertainment crowd and people from around the world. And that in turn will spawn more destination venues like restaurants and bars.”

The Hustler folks say that they'll be relocating their store.

UPDATE 3:48 p.m.: The House of Blues could be torn down at any time in the next three years, not necessarily by the end of 2015. They're also looking for a new spot to relocate to. Jim Yeager, a spokesperson for House of Blues Entertainment sent LAist the following statement:

Our legendary House of Blues on Sunset Blvd.— the flagship for 20 years of our popular venues around the country — will operate business as usual while we look for a new home. We have a terrific relationship with our landlord who has other plans to develop the property and we’re working together on a very smooth transition. We have at least three years to find that perfect spot for a new Los Angeles House of Blues home with no interruption for music fans. Stay tuned. The best is yet to come.