Jarvis Johnson and Bikers for Trump founder Chris Cox argue outside of President Trump’s rally in Phoenix, Aug. 22, 2017. (Photo: Hunter Walker/Yahoo News)

PHOENIX — Temperatures and tempers ran hot as President Trump prepared to hold a rally at the Phoenix Convention Center on Tuesday evening. Crowds of Trump supporters and protesters feuded in the triple-digit heat outside the event, while many wondered whether the president would launch an attack on his critics inside the Republican Party.

Police attempted to keep Trump’s fans away from the protesters, many of whom carried signs that criticized the president’s response to the violence in Charlottesville, Va., earlier this month. The dueling crowds did taunt each other across fences and, at times, the lines were crossed. At one point, a group of protesters carrying a sign that declared “F*** Trump” and one that blended the presidential “45” with a Nazi swastika walked alongside the long line of the president’s supporters. The anti-Trump contingent drew an angry response from the president’s supporters, who stretched in long lines around the building that reportedly included some Trump fans who waited outside since Monday night.

“Get back on the other side!” shouted one of the Trump supporters.

“Get a job!” yelled another.

The Trump supporters cheered as a loud roar of motorcycles erupted from a nearby street.

“That’s Bikers for Trump!” one said, referencing a group of motorcyclists that formed during last year’s election to provide security for pro-Trump events.

Police are in front of a fence separating Trump supporters and protesters. The groups are yelling back and forth at each other. pic.twitter.com/gJ5ZPpx1y3 — Hunter Walker (@hunterw) August 22, 2017

Many of the protesters in Phoenix chanted “No Trump! No KKK! No fascist USA!” Some also carried photos of Heather Heyer, a young woman who was killed at a right wing rally in Charlottesville when a neo-Nazi sympathizer drove his car into a crowd of protesters. Two police officers were also killed after their helicopter crashed as they attempted to respond to clashes between the right-wing rallygoers and protesters.

Slideshow: Trump rally in Phoenix draws protesters from both sides >>>

Trump was widely criticized for his responses to the chaos in Charlottesville as he blamed “both sides” for the violence rather than focusing on the white supremacists who came to the rally. The president also empathized with the rally attendees concern about the removal of Confederate monuments.

The crowds outside Trump’s Phoenix rally also included several groups taking advantage of Arizona’s “open carry” laws and brandishing rifles. One group of camouflage-clad men armed with assault rifles repeatedly said “no comment” as Yahoo News asked them why they came to the rally. Another group with guns and camp had signs identifying them as the John Brown Gun Club. One of the members offered a quick explanation of their presence.

“We’re a community defense organization, so we’re here to provide security and make sure nobody is attacked by white nationalists or fascists,” the man said before walking away.

Trump supporters and protesters face off near the Phoenix Convention Center as the president holds a rally inside, Aug. 22, 2017. (Photo: Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call via Getty Images) More

In addition to the tensions in the streets, Trump’s rally in the Arizona capital highlighted drama inside the GOP. The state’s two U.S. senators, Jeff Flake and John McCain, have been some of Trump’s harshest Republican critics in Washington. Flake is currently up for reelection and Trump has attacked Flake while praising his opponent, Kelli Ward. Ahead of Trump’s Phoenix event, speculation swirled about whether he would fire further shots at Flake or offer Ward an endorsement from the stage. However, Ward was not granted a spot inside the rally with invited VIPs. Ahead of the event, she walked along the lines of Trump supporters outside, many of whom carried her signs and stickers. Ward told Yahoo News she was “excited” to “welcome President Trump to Phoenix.”