CLOSE Ditch that "processed cheese product" for the real deal. Buzz60

More fast-food and fast-casual restaurants are serving queso. (Photo: Karin Lau, Getty Images)

For those who like food that's oozes, spicy melted cheese is a hot trend among fast-food and fast-casual restaurants.

Chile con queso, often referred to simply as queso, has long been a Tex-Mex favorite. Now it's bringing its gooey goodness to chains across the U.S.

Chipotle devotees, long puzzled by the dish's absence from the company's menu, cheered last week when the chain announced it was testing queso at its public test kitchen in New York.

Also last week, Wendy’s unveiled its new Bacon Queso Burger, Bacon Queso Chicken Sandwich and Bacon Queso Fries, which will be on the menu until mid-August.

And in November, Taco Bell made its queso by trying it out with a Steakhouse Burrito and Steakhouse Nachos for a limited time.

Related:

Couple gets married at Taco Bell in Las Vegas

Sorry McDonald’s, Wendy’s Twitter account is winning the war on beef

Chipotle shuts Virginia store after reports of illnesses

"It’s fairly easy for them to execute. It’s melted cheese. It’s a higher (profit) margin item," said Howard Penney, managing director of Hedgeye Risk Management.

Chipotle's queso debut was long in coming because the chain, known for embracing natural ingredients, didn't want to use additives to keep the cheese stable. Instead, it's using potato starch and tapioca starch, which makes the queso a bit grittier. If the approximately month-long experiment in New York is a success, it'll roll out more broadly with California and Colorado likely among the initial markets, according to Chief Marketing Officer Mark Crumpacker.

“Queso is something that’s been requested from us for many, many years. Pretty much since we started,” he said last week.

Queso has long been a staple on the Qdoba Mexican Eats and Moe's Southwest Grill menus. Wendy's added it even though it isn't known for its Mexican fare.

"Wendy's knows how passionate people have become about queso. In fact, this passion often turns into obsession. Good news for those folks, Wendy's is also obsessed!," the company said in its July 11 announcement.

If Wendy's queso trio is a hit, queso could become firmly entrenched in the larger quick-service world, according to Penney.

"There’s no intellectual property associated with queso sauce. If someone is successful by them having queso sauce, you can be guaranteed, they’ll do it," he said. "If a Burger King customer is going to go to Wendy’s to get queso sauce, they’re going to (introduce) queso sauce."

Other chains may come to embrace queso because it is an item that adds value that can make diners more willing to swallow a higher price and is easy to prepare in centralized locations and replicate without having to reengineer kitchens, said Aaron Allen, founder of the Orlando-based eponymous global restaurant consulting firm.

And quite simply, people like the taste

"We’re seeing an overall migration toward bolder flavors," he said. "There’s a certain approachability to it. It's easy to say. Americans can read it. It gets you authenticity. It gets you cheese. It gets you flavor. And it still makes sense in a fast-food or fast-casual menu environment."

Follow USA TODAY reporter Zlati Meyer on Twitter: @ZlatiMeyer

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2uILc0J