NORTH Korea has promised a “great war” is coming as the US’s aircraft carrier-led strike force closes in on Kim Jong-un.

The tyrant continues to march towards nuclear armageddon while Donald Trump’s “powerful armada” approaches the rogue state. USS Carl Vinson is leading the strike group which is being dispatched in a bid to spook Pyongyang – with them expected to arrive in the Sea of Japan next week. War talk continues to spew from the rogue state as it issued its latest chilling warning of an impeding “great war” Meanwhile, Admiral Lord West warned North Korea and the US are heading toward "catastrophe" amid fears a strike from Trump.

GETTY NORTH KOREA: Kim Jong-un's rogue state promised a 'great war' agains

Inside North Korea: The pictures Kim Jong-un doesn't want you to see Since 2008, photographer Eric Lafforgue ventured to North Korea six times. Thanks to digital memory cards, he was able to save photos that was forbidden to take inside the segregated state 1 / 62 Eric Lafforgue/Exclusivepix Medi Taking pictures in the DMZ is easy, but if you come too close to the soldiers, they stop you

“Our army and people will start a great war of justice” North Korea Nuclear threats from North Korea have peaked amid fears Kim is preparing a sixth nuke bomb test next week. The US President has taken a tough line on Pyongyang after a string of missile tests – including a failed launch last Sunday. Kim is determined to develop a nuclear weapon capable of striking the mainland US.

KCNA

GETTY

North Korea’s state media wrote: “If the US provokes the DPRK even a bit, its army and people will start a great war of justice for national reunification without hesitation. "Noting that the U.S. warmongers hysterically try to ignite a war by mobilizing nuclear strategic assets without any measure to deal with the consequences to be entailed. "The U.S. has now gone seriously mad. It is mulling frightening the DPRK and achieving something with nuclear strategic bombers, nuclear carriers, etc. "However, the army and people of the DPRK will never be browbeaten by such bluffing.:

Kim Jong BLING: the luxury lifestyle of North Korea's tubby tyrant As his people starve in gulags, North Korean tyrant Kim Jong-un is renowned for his extravagant and luxurious lifestyle. Basketball player Dennis Rodman, who spent time with the dictator, said "Everything you want, he has the best" 1 / 14 AFP Horses are a well known extravagance of the super-rich

Confusion initially reigned as the USS Carl Vinson strike force headed for the Indian Ocean – going further away from North Korea. But this week the aircraft carrier and its destroyers turned North and is now due to arrive this week in the Sea of Japan. Both China and Russia are watching nervously amid fears a flood of refugees could wash over their borders if the US strikes North Korea. Russian tanks have reached their land border with North Korea as Putin calls for calm in the Korean Peninsula.

Kim Jong-un's CHILLING display of nuclear might Kim Jong-un used the annual "Day of the Sun" parade in Pyongyang to make a chilling display of the country's burgeoning nuclear power and military might 1 / 30 EPA Military vehicles carrying missiles believed to be North Korean KN-08 Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles