Donald Trump Donald John TrumpHouse committee believes it has evidence Trump requested putting ally in charge of Cohen probe: report Vietnamese airline takes steps to open flights to US on sidelines of Trump-Kim summit Manafort's attorneys say he should get less than 10 years in prison MORE is demanding that The New York Times retract and apologize for a "libelous" article published Wednesday in which two women allege that Trump kissed or groped them without consent.

ADVERTISEMENT

In a letter to Times Executive Editor Dean Baquet published late Wednesday, the Republican nominee's lawyer claims the article is an attempt to undermine Trump's presidential campaign.

“Your article is reckless, defamatory and constitutes libel per se. It is apparent from, among other things, the timing of the article, that it is nothing more than a politically-motivated effort to defeat Mr. Trump’s candidacy,” Marc E. Kasowitz wrote.

The letter states that the Times’s investigation into the “false and malicious allegations” was “entirely inadequate.”

“Clearly, the New York Times is willing to provide a platform to anyone wishing to smear Mr. Trump’s name and reputation prior to the election irrespective of whether the alleged statements have any basis in fact,” the letter reads.

The letter goes on to demand that the Times cease any further publication of the article, remove it from its website and issue a full retraction and apology.

“Failure to do so will leave my client with no option but to pursue all available actions and remedies," Kasowitz concludes.

In the Times article, published Wednesday evening, one woman alleges that Trump grabbed her breasts and tried to put his hand up her skirt while the two were sitting next to each other on a plane more than 30 years ago. Another says that in 2005, she met Trump in an elevator in Trump Tower and he tried to kiss her.

After the Times article was published, several other similar allegations emerged in different outlets, including one from a former People magazine reporter who said Trump pushed her up against a wall and started trying to kiss her at his Florida resort.

Trump's campaign has vehemently denied the claims.