Sold out

SHIPPING NOWSingle Editions:Platinum Pack - Limited to 25Our 3rd release in conjunction with Synapse Films is that of SUSPIRIA. This edition’s quality is beyond words, but if you want an explanation you have plenty of that to be found below! Completely packed, crazily restored, and the ultimate definitive edition of SUSPIRIA in SteelBook form housed in HDN commissioned artwork from some of the best recognizable and talented artists on the scene. Following up on their consistent designs from Tenebrae and Phenomena we have brought on QuiltFace Studios “QFS” and The Dark Inker once more and added Matt Ryan Tobin for his amazing take on SUSPIRIA.Each Slipbox will be semi-gloss with special print finishes and each edition will feature three 4x6 screen printed artcards by one of the best screen print poster printers in the business. QFS and MRT will feature silver metallic ink and DI will feature red metallic as well. Each edition comes with a bonus limited challenge coin in which the Blood Red Regular is limited to 125 and the Argento Rosa (Pink Silver) is limited to 75. They are awarded at random with single edition orders and only the Platinum Packs guarantee you one of each coin.Dario Argento's masterpiece of horror comes to home video from Synapse Films in an exclusive new 4K restoration from the original uncut, uncensored 35mm Italian camera negative and with the original 4.0 English surround sound, for the first time EVER! Painstakingly restored over the past three years, Synapse Films has created the ultimate special edition of SUSPIRIA with the supervision and approval of the film's Director of Photography, Luciano Tovoli, and loaded with a separate Blu-ray disc of amazing extras. SUSPIRIA is now presented in its original glory for its 40th Anniversary!The set will include two Blu-rays + 1 CD. The film will be on its own Blu-ray disc, to maximize the quality for both picture and sound, with most extra features being on a separate Blu-ray. The set will be Region A locked. CD obviously not locked.SPECIAL FEATURES:Three disc [Two Blu-rays + One CD] limited collector’s edition containing a new 4K restoration of the original uncut, uncensored Italian 35mm camera negative exclusively done by Synapse Films, with color correction supervised and approved by SUSPIRIA Director of Photography, Luciano TovoliOriginal 4.0 1977 English language LCRS sound mix not heard since the theatrical release in 1977, presented in high-resolution DTS-HD MA 96 Khz/24-bit audioItalian 5.1 surround sound mixTwo audio commentaries by authors and Argento scholars, Derek Botelho, David Del Valle & Troy HowarthDo You Know Anything About Witches? - 30 minute SUSPIRIA visual essay written, edited and narrated by Michael MackenzieSuzy in Nazi Germany – Featurette on the German locations from SUSPIRIAA Sigh from the Depths: 40 Years of SUSPIRIA – All-new anniversary retrospective on the making of the film and its influence on cinemaOlga’s Story – Interview with star Barbara MagnolfiOriginal theatrical trailers, TV spots and radio spotsSpecial Collector Edition Booklet containing an American Cinematographer interview with Luciano Tovoli, liner notes by Derek Botelho and restoration notes by Vincent Pereira & Don May, Jr. Cover artwork by Matthew Therrien Illustration“International Classics” English “Breathing Letters” opening credit sequence from U.S. release versionAlternate All-English opening and closing credits sequences, playable via seamless branchingNewly translated, removable English SDH subtitles for the English language versionNewly translated, removable English subtitles for the Italian language versionExclusive CD remaster of Goblin’s SUSPIRIA motion picture soundtrack, containing additional tracks not included on the original 1977 soundtrack release