Maybe you did so much wrong you get a chance to try again. You’ve been bound into service of a higher power, like it or not….

Angelic Path

You were give another chance. This chance may not have been by choice, but you made the choice of your own free will…kind of. You are now bound to a higher authority who rules you with an iron rod. Step out of line again, and the creature currently trying to kill you will be the least of your problems!

Expending Spell List

The Angel lets you choose from an expanded list of spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following spells are added to the warlock spell list for you.

1st bless, shield of faith

2nd aid, lesser restoration

3rd daylight, protection from energy

4th death ward, guardian of faith

5th hallow, greater restoration

Font of Healing

Starting at level one, gain the lay on hands class feature from the paladin. But your patron wants you to learn humility, so you may never use these to heal yourself.

Voice of the Master

Starting at 6th level, when you make a persuasion check to improve your relationship with an NPC and truthfully mean your intention with no malice, you gain advantage on the check. However, you are racked with pain if you scream at or lie to others, so your first intimidate or deception check with any NPC is made with disadvantage. After using this ability, you can not use it again until you finish a short or long rest, but your penalty to intimidate and deception is always active .

Celestial Blessing

Starting at 10th level, you gain resistance to radiant damage and immunity to being charmed or frightened.

One’s Own Wickedness

Starting at level 14, as an action you can target a creature you can see for divine retribution. The target must make a Charisma saving throw with the DC equal to your Warlock spell save DC. If it fails, it evaporates in a pillar of light and it teleported to foot of your master where it sins are examined. Each round, at the start of its turns, it takes damage depending on its alignment. Good creatures take 2d6 radiant damage, neutral creatures take 3d8 radiant damage, and evil creatures take 4d10 radiant damage. At the end of the creatures turn it may plead to be released and sent back a with a Charisma saving throw equal to your Warlock spell save DC. The creature can also voluntarily take a geas from your master cast as a 9th level spell with no saving throw to be teleported back at the end of its turn.

After using this ability, you can not use this again until you finish a short or long rest.

Advertisements