To see this bias in action, consider a 2014 case at Washington and Lee University. The accuser initially admitted to a friend that her first sexual experience with the accused was enjoyable, and she had sex with him again a month later. But eight months later, after working at a women’s clinic that dealt with sexual violence and after seeing a therapist, she began to believe that the first encounter was nonconsensual because she had been intoxicated. Following an investigation in which the accused student was discouraged from seeking legal representation, he was expelled. He sued the school, claiming gender discrimination and that the school’s Title IX officer, who carried out the investigation, had said “regret equals rape” at a campus event. (She denies this.)

The university asked Judge Norman Moon of Federal District Court in Virginia to dismiss the case, but he refused. If the accused student’s allegations were true, the judge said, they “suggest that W.&L.’s disciplinary procedures, at least when it comes to charges of sexual misconduct, amount to a practice of railroading accused students.” The school settled the suit in February 2016.

Many complaints by students accused of assault claim anti-male bias in Title IX enforcement. In some cases, that conclusion is difficult to avoid. In a 2014 lawsuit against Duke University, for example, a dean testified that if both parties are intoxicated, it is the man’s responsibility “to gain consent before proceeding with sex.”

But women, too, get caught in the net. Last year BuzzFeed wrote about a woman expelled from Washington State University for nonconsensual sexual contact with a male student whom she took to her dorm room after a drinking session. The school’s report on the case shows that over the next several days, other students teased the young man because she was considered unattractive and that jokes about his being “taken advantage of” reached the resident adviser, prompting an investigation.

Clearly, the current system needs to change. Allowing schools to use a higher standard of proof in disciplinary proceedings would be a good first step. Other possible solutions include better coordination with law enforcement — expulsion from school is a shockingly inadequate punishment for rape — as well as counseling and mediation in cases where a student feels aggrieved but the incident does not rise to the level of sexual assault. And any efforts to combat the widespread culture of binge-drinking should be applauded.