Diesel the police dog who died during a counter-terror raid in Paris in November was shot dead by an officer's bullet, it has been claimed.

The Belgian Shepherd was killed as police stormed a flat in the French capital on November 18 - three days after ISIS extremists had murdered 130 people in the city.

But now it has been claimed that the seven-year-old animal was struck by friendly fire as French officers were targeting the so-called mastermind of the mass killings days earlier.

Diesel the police dog who died during a counter-terror raid in Paris in November was shot dead by an officer's bullet, it has been claimed

Diesel, who was honoured with a bravery award for his actions, was credited with saving lives after he was sent in to the building to sniff out booby traps amid attempts to target Abdelhamid Abaaoud.

There were reports at the time that he died when a woman came out firing an AK-47 at police and then detonated her suicide vest.

However, later investigations revealed the three extremists inside may only have had a single handgun between them - with just nine rounds of ammunition.

Mediapart quoted a senior police source as saying that, amid chaotic scenes, at least 40 bullets rained down on police shields - likely to have been fired by their own officers - during which the animal may have been killed.

Diesel's death sparked a wave of mourning across social media, under the Twitter hashtag #JeSuisChien.

Diesel, who was honoured with a bravery award for his actions, was credited with saving lives after he was sent in to the building to sniff out booby traps amid attempts to target Abdelhamid Abaaoud (pictured)

The Belgian Shepherd was killed as police stormed a flat in the French capital on November 18 - three days after ISIS extremists had murdered 130 people in the city. Police are pictured at the scene

The hashtag, which means I am a dog and was trending on Twitter, is a reference to the worldwide cry of solidarity 'Je Suis Charlie' in the wake of the terror attacks on Charlie Hebdo magazine in January.

Vet charity PDSA said Diesel was to posthumously receive the Dickin Medal, recognised as the animal equivalent of the military's highest honour.

One police handler said it was 'a little like losing one of our colleagues' while a Twitter user said Diesel had 'died to defend our colours'.

In the wake of Diesel's death, Russia showed its solidarity with France - by donating a new puppy to carry on Diesel's memory.