Honda Center and the Anaheim Ducks announced today that the venue will unveil a new state-of-the-art scoreboard in September in advance of the 2015-16 NHL season.

“We could not be more pleased to make this announcement knowing this upgrade will take the Anaheim Ducks live game experience to a new level,” said Tim Ryan, President/CEO of Honda Center and Executive Vice President/COO of the Anaheim Ducks. “With a much larger video display area and superior HD quality video and sound, this upgrade certainly falls right in line with our ownership’s commitment to keeping Honda Center among the most technologically advanced arenas in the world.”

The new scoreboard screens will measure nearly 20-feet-tall and over 30-feet-wide, and feature a display area more than four times the square footage of what the arena currently operates. The six millimeter diode equipped hardware will feature 912 by 1440 lines of resolution, the clearest and highest definition picture available in any North American venue.

Honda Center will once again partner with Daktronics for the installation of the new scoreboard, allowing for seamless integration of the existing LED rings and end zone board technology. Daktronics is the world's industry leader in designing and manufacturing electronic scoreboards, programmable display systems and large screen video displays. In addition to the in-bowl upgrades, Honda Center’s main video control and edit suites will be completely upgraded.

“Daktronics is proud to continue our relationship with the Anaheim Duck and Honda Center,” said Jay Parker, Vice President-Live Events & Spectaculars for Daktronics. “We are excited to install a state-of-the-art HD display in the arena and are confident fans will enjoy the vast improvement in size and clarity.”

Since 2005, Henry and Susan Samueli have invested nearly $100 million into facility upgrades, most of which have a direct positive impact on the guest experience. In the fall of 2013, Honda Center unveiled the largest single renovation in the venue’s 20 year history, The Grand Terrace - a 15,000-square-foot indoor-outdoor entertainment space which also included a new world-class team store location and 220-seat restaurant space.

The arena has also installed and fully implemented Cisco’s StadiumVision system, which utilizes more than 500 high-definition monitors and 40 video walls to create a truly immersive multimedia experience throughout the venue. As part of an extensive environmental initiative last season, Honda Center installed Bloom Energy Fuel cells to generate power through a clean and efficient electrochemical process, which provides more than half of the power required by the arena each year.

Construction on Honda Center’s new center-hung scoreboard will begin immediately following the conclusion of the 2014-15 hockey season, with completion set for September of this year.