In a short televised speech, the Dutch Queen said it was time to place the nation “in the hands of a new generation”.

Queen Beatrix turns 75 in just a few days and is already the country’s oldest ever monarch. Both her mother, Queen Julianna, and her grandmother, Queen Wilhelmina, also abdicated and the Dutch do not see being king or queen as a job for life.

“I am not abdicating because this office is too much of a burden, but out of conviction that the responsibility for our nation should now rest in the hands of a new generation,” Queen Beatrix said, in a speech delivered from her Huis ten Bosch palace.

“I am deeply grateful for the great faith you have shown in me in the many years that I could be your Queen,” she added.

The Dutch Queen praised her eldest son, Prince Willem-Alexander, as a talented and capable successor 'fully prepared’ for his future role.

Queen Beatrix, right, will abdicate in favour of her son Willem-Alexander Photo: AFP

She said he would assume the throne on April 30 at the high point of a year of celebrations to mark the end of the Napoleonic occupation in 1813. The Kingdom of the Netherlands was then established two years later.

Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, also broadcast to the nation to thank Queen Beatrix for her long record of service to the nation. “Since her coronation in 1980s she’s applied herself heart and soul for Dutch society,” he said. “She has grown into a Dutch icon.”

The Queen’s abdication signals the end of the reign of one of Europe’s longest serving monarchs. She assumed the throne in 1980 when her mother, Queen Julianna, stepped down after 32 years. Her grandmother, Queen Wilhelmina, abdicated in 1948 after a reign of 58 years.

She has maintained the popularity of the House of Orange despite a series of family controversies and is abdicating while her eldest son, Willem-Alexander is a relatively youthful 45.

Willem-Alexander will become the first Dutch king since Willem III, who reigned until his death in 1890. A member of the International Olympic Committee, he is a trained pilot and expert in water management who has long been groomed for the throne.

He courted controversy however, with his choice to marry investment banker Maxima Zorreguieta, whose father was an agriculture minister in the military junta that ruled Argentina with an iron fist in the late 1970s and early '80s.

Queen Beatrix, who graduated in law from Leiden University in 1961, maintained a slimmed down “common-touch” royal household,

Observers believe she remained on the throne for so long in part because of unrest in Dutch society as the country struggled to assimilate more and more immigrants and shifted away from its traditional reputation as one of the world’s most tolerant nations.

In her Christmas Day speech in 2010, she made a heartfelt plea for unity, saying, “with each other we all make up one society.”

However she tested Dutch goodwill on several occasions in her lifetime, most notably when she married Claus von Amsberg, a German diplomat who had been a member of the Hitler Youth. He died in 2002.

Other tragedies dogged the monarch during her last years on the throne. A deranged loner tried to slam a car into an open-topped bus carrying members of the royal family as they celebrated the Queens Day national holiday in 2010. The driver killed seven people gathered to watch the royals and the brazen attack shocked the nation. The royal family was unharmed in the incident and the 38-year old attacker was killed.

Meanwhile, Queen Beatrix’s middle son, Prince Johan Friso, has been in a coma since he was buried in an avalanche while skiing last year.

Queen Beatrix is expected to move to Drakensteyn castle as queen mother at the end of April.