Are you sick of accidentally stumbling across neon-flashing, flesh-saturated sites as you peruse the Internet? Fear not, web users.

A Florida-based Internet registry, once headquartered in Toronto, hopes to redirect the adult entertainment industry to newly released .XXX domains available for purchase by the general public starting Tuesday. “While adult entertainment is enjoyable to many adults, it is not appropriate for all audiences,” said ICM Registry CEO Stuart Lawley in a release. “We created .XXX to address the unique needs of the online adult entertainment industry. The public response has been overwhelming as consumers and the adult entertainment providers are excited about the benefits and infinite possibilities of .XXX.” So does this mean no more accidentally misspelling familiar website URLs and finding yourself in unchartered territory?

Article Continued Below

Internet governance and policy experts are skeptical porn sites will migrate en masse to the new domains. And they’ve been raising alarm bells at the potential for censorship set by new top-level domains like .XXX. On one hand, the domains provide a legitimate brand for porn industry sites to easily direct customers to their content and provide them with a malware-free and hack-safe environment. The registry also requires companies registering new domains to “safeguard children from being marketed or targeted online,” adding to the fight against the sexual exploitation of children online. But Robert Guerra, special adviser to the director for Citizen Lab, part of the University of Toronto’s Munk School of Global Affairs, says .XXX domains could set an unwelcome precedent in Internet free expression.

“It may actually usher in a new age of censorship,” Guerra said. “We really need to monitor very closely whether sites are going to be more easily blocked.” While .XXX domains remain voluntary, he said governments could soon regulate that porn sites be migrated to .XXX, which would give more conservative countries the ability to shut them out entirely.

Article Continued Below

Top-level domain registries must be approved by ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, a global NGO that regulates domains globally. With more than a dozen new top-level domains already registered and countless more in the works, the possibilities for new domains are endless – Think .love, .pets, .kids, or .travel. These new possibilities also create difficult questions, Guerra said. “What if the Tibetan community wants to create .tibet?” he said. “Is it something the Chinese government will be able to object to?” But it also means parents can more easily block sites they don’t want their children to access. Businesses are also raising concern about the new domains, arguing they’ll have to purchase .XXX domains to protect their brand. The firm that runs Playboy’s website is reportedly suing ICM Registry over the new domains, arguing it creates an unnecessary fee for the porn industry to maintain an extra domain. “It’s going to impose a cost burden on organizations,” Guerra said. “In a way it’s like a tax.” As of Tuesday night, playboy.xxx and toronto.xxx were bought up, while robford.xxx remained available for purchase for just over $100 a year through an accredited domain registrar. Before the domains became generally available, ICM Registry offered companies within the adult industry early opportunities to register their .XXX domains. Gay.XXX was reportedly purchased by Corbin Fisher, a major gay pornography production studio, for $500,000.