Today during their Winter TCA presentation, Hulu gave critics its first look at The Path, its first prestige drama (not based on a Stephen King novel). The Path follows the intense drama that unfolds within a religious cult when one of its members begins to question the faith’s purpose. The show stars Aaron Paul, Michelle Monaghan, Hugh Dancy, and Rockmond Dunbar. It was created by Jessica Goldberg and boasts Friday Night Lights mastermind Jason Katims as a Executive Producer. After the impressive trailer finished rolling, Hulu’s Senior Vice President and Head of Content Craig Erwich said, “It’s really that good.”

Aaron Paul wasn’t looking to jump back into TV straight after Breaking Bad, but he told the crowd that he “could not ignore the material.” Later after the panel, he admitted that he was terrified to go back to TV. In fact, he originally passed on The Path. After a few “sleepless nights,” he called back “pleading, begging” to play the role. He explained, “All the true, gritty storytelling is being done on television. I don’t know why I was afraid to jump back into TV right away.”

When I asked him after the panel if he felt any pressure for his next work to live up to the hulking legacy of Breaking Bad, Paul said, “Yeah, deep down, you always kind of always have that pressure, but I always said [after Breaking Bad] it’s all downhill from here.”

“I’m really having the greatest time [on The Path] We’ve captured lightning in a bottle yet again and I really, truly feel that people are going to be excited about this project.”

Creator Alison Goldberg told the crowd that the show was not — as the internet suggested — inspired by Scientology, but a “double whammy” of a year where she lost loved ones and went through a divorce. The experience made her examine what we put our faith in, but her favorite part of writing the show is a bit more naughty. “I love writing the romance. The sex. Really fun,” she told the crowd.

Yes, The Path is a show about a cult, but Hugh Dancy, who plays the Meyerist movement’s charismatic leader Cal Roberts, quipped during the panel, “We like the phrase ‘movement.'”

Dancy is coming off of a stellar run playing the beleaguered Will Graham on the cult favorite show Hannibal. He said that “on the surface, Cal’s having an easier time than Will,” hinting at the “complicated” nature of both the character and the show. When reporters asked him after the panel if it’s possible for the show to return, Dancy was optimistic, but then added, “I just think that if I keep saying it, then it might happen!”

The Path premieres exclusively on Hulu on March 30.