Despite all the rumours and the offers, Matt Duchene has still not be traded. Perhaps this was the opportunity the Montreal Canadiens have been waiting for.

Enough is enough already. One of the biggest trade targets over the past two seasons, has been yo-yo’d constantly. Matt Duchene is being shopped, but then he isn’t moved. The Colorado Avalanche will definitely trade away Duchene, but he stays where he is. The Montreal Canadiens were linked to the center before and considering how the situation is now, they may want to take another stab at it.

Again, I’ll have to bring up the $8.5 million in cap space (cue the collective sigh). It’s been a mystery as to what this space will be used for. There were other players still available that the Montreal Canadiens could sign. However, with the limited space on the roster, it wouldn’t make too much sense to bring in another free agent.

There was also the hope that the space for an offer sheet. But who are we kidding, the gentlemen’s agreement among general managers nips that possibility in the rear end.

So, the only other option was that Marc Bergevin was waiting for an opportunity to make a trade. That makes sense. It matches up with what team owner Geoff Molson said at the Place Bell public opening last week.

Duchene and the Habs were used in the same sentence a lot last season. Unfortunately, Avalanche GM Joe Sakic‘s price for the center was pretty high to say the least. Originally the price was a coveted young defenceman, a top prospect, and a first round pick. At the time you’re looking at Nathan Beaulieu, Mikhail Sergachev, and the team’s 2017 first who turned out to be Ryan Poehling.

The price seemed to be updated a little bit. Darren Dreger appeared on TSN 1290 in Winnipeg and spoke on what the Avalanche were looking for in Duchene trade.

As high as a couple of first-round picks, or at least a first-round pick and a former first-round draft pick who’s now a young NHL prospect, and then some and then some.

As you can see, the price is still high. That was back in July though. What will make this whole “Duchene Watch” more interesting is whether he actually plays for Colorado this season. At the moment, it doesn’t look good.

Obviously a player doesn’t have to go to the skates before training camp, but it is seen a lot. As we speak NHL players are returning to their cities and skating with their teammates in preparation of the new season. Duchene is not.

For what it’s worth, it’ll be pretty shocking if Duchene sits out of camp. He didn’t have the best season last year and will want to show teams that he can be a lot better. He wont be able to do that sitting out, but his resume does speak for itself.

If Sakic’s price is still the same, then forget it, the trade wont happen. However, if Duchene sits out longer into the month, it may force him to change things up. That could be what the Montreal Canadiens were waiting for.

The 26-year-old will be making $6 million for the next two seasons. With the cap space they have this season, and the fact that Tomas Plekanec‘s $6 million will probably be coming off the books this year, the Habs could make it work money-wise.

Roster-wise, it will be unlikely that both Jonathan Drouin and Alex Galchenyuk play center if Duchene is acquired. Bergevin will be the shark swimming around that Colorado ocean, and if he can do it, he probably will.

Want your voice heard? Join the A Winning Habit team! Write for us!

Do you think the Habs should still pursue Duchene? What would you give up for him? Let us know your thoughts in the comments!