Text size

Bitcoin isn’t exactly your classic value investment. It’s one of the most volatile assets in the world, and it doesn’t have much of a “book” value – unlike a company that owns physical assets, Bitcoin can’t sell its headquarters if things get rough. There is, of course, no Bitcoin headquarters.

But Murray Stahl, a longtime value investor who now manages $5.5 billion at his New York-based investment firm Horizon Kinetics, considers Bitcoin “the ultimate value investment.” His original $7 million investment from two years ago has ballooned as Bitcoin’s price has soared, and he now holds about $100 million worth. As of Monday, each Bitcoin is worth about $9,500.

A central point in Stahl’s pro-Bitcoin argument: Traditional currencies can be “debased” as central banks print more of it and spark inflation, but there will be only 21 million Bitcoins ever made.

We asked him why he first invested, how he convinced clients that this made sense in their portfolios, and how high Bitcoin can go.

Barron's: How is Bitcoin possibly a value investment?



Stahl: It's the ultimate value investment. If your money is being debased. what good is buying a bond that yields 2%? Let's say it has very high credit worthiness. You are going to get paid, but inflation is at least 2% and then you've got to pay taxes. It is a guaranteed negative real rate of return.

The central banks around the world all have more or less the same monetary policy, which is, in a word, debasement. If you want to hedge the systematic risk you have to take something that is outside of the system, and cryptocurrency is outside the system. So, if you have at least a little doubt about the wisdom of some of the policies that are being adopted in a monetary sense, then to the degree you have a doubt – let's say your doubt is a fraction of 1 percent – then put a fraction of 1 percent of your money in something outside of the system.

Barron's : When you first brought this up to your clients, how did it go?

Stahl: We would introduce the subject, explain a little about it, and 99% of the people had no idea what we are talking about. So we would sponsor these lunches. I would write some stuff to help explain it and I would basically summarize the stuff that is in the written work and I would take questions. The questions would go on for hours and I handled every question, because it is basically a civilizational change. This requires a lot of explanation, and it still might not work. It is important to know. Even I will say its success is, by no stretch of the imagination, guaranteed.

Barron's : How high can the price go?

Stahl: I've got a value, but it is so preposterous I wouldn't tell anybody, because it is much higher than today's price; it would be meaningless to anybody. I think it is worth much, much more than what today's price is. I won't tell you a number. I'll tell you how I get to a number. So, basically the premise is that Bitcoin or some cryptocurrency is accepted as a means of the exchange. Let's say that premise proves to be valid. Well then, because it is a worldwide currency it is valued by a law of no arbitrage. It has to be equal to the nominal value of all the fiat currencies in the world. At least that, maybe even more because it is non-inflationary.

Barron's : So is your price target the value of all fiat currency in the world?

Stahl: Yes, whatever that number is. [Editor’s note: One recent estimate for the cumulative value of the world’s coins and banknotes is $7.6 trillion, which would make each Bitcoin worth $361,000.]

Barron's : But as currency, Bitcoin is still very difficult to use. It’s expensive, it’s slow, the computers that run the network use an incredible amount of energy.

Stahl: All true. Every word you are saying is completely true, and probably other things that aren't even mentioned are true, too. However, here is the other side of it. You're Wal-Mart, you have, let's say, a 2% profit margin. What do you pay to Visa and Mastercard? Because virtually every transaction is a credit card transaction. What does any retailer pay in this world of shrinking retail margins? The problem is not the technology. They are going to make it faster.

Here is the problem that's more difficult to solve. You're Wal-Mart and someone buys something for $10. They pay in Bitcoin [Wal-Mart does not currently accept Bitcoin]. How do you know a minute later it is still worth $10? It could go up, it could go down. You need to be able to dispose of it or hedge it virtually instantaneously. You need to be able to get rid of it in nanoseconds or you need to be able to hedge it. CME and CBOE are now doing Bitcoin futures. Once you are able to hedge it, then you can take out the volatility, then you could work on the problem of making it faster. So what you need to do is, you need to truly have the merchants be willing to accept cryptocurrency and therefore to be willing to invest the money to make it faster.

Barron's : And yet you still think there is a chance Bitcoin goes to zero, is that correct?

Stahl: Well, there is always a chance anything can happen.

Barron's : And under what scenario would it go to zero?

Stahl: If crypto or Bitcoin in particularly became an accepted means of transactions, there are a lot of organizations that would be negatively impacted in the extreme. It is only reasonable to expect that they will try to impede the cryptocurrency movement. I don't think it is a high probability because there are so many more organizations that would benefit from it – a retailer being a self-evident example. A bank might hate it, and a retailer like a Wal-Mart might love it. It is a question of who wins. I think ultimately the people are going to win, because the people are going to insist upon the crypto, because it is a way of saving money without being debased. I think everybody is going to come to understand that.

Barron's: Are you looking to put more money into this?

Stahl: In different aspects of cryptocurrency, yes. There are different opportunities in cryptocurrency.

Barron's : Not just Bitcoin?

Stahl: Not just Bitcoin, yes, that's true. There are other opportunities, and maybe there are even opportunities in Bitcoin as well. There are different things you can do like you can mine it, which is another way and we do that as well.

Barron's : You mine Bitcoin too? At your offices in New York?

Stahl: We're in New York, but the servers aren't in New York. One day we actually plugged in one server in New York just to see if we could mine, and we did it for a couple of hours. We are not going to make a habit of it and you don't want to do it. Did you ever see one of these things plugged in? It sounds like a vacuum cleaner because it has a fan on it. So if you imagine you had 50 of them, the neighbors could really complain. You could leave it on for an hour they think you are having work done in your office or you are vacuuming or something with a real powerful vacuum cleaner. But you wouldn’t want to have a couple of hundred of them on you would be in big trouble.

Barron's : Bitcoin is generally associated with millennials outside the traditional financial world. Do you feel like you can understand it despite being from another generation and background?

Stahl: The millennial world is just a state of mind -- you have to be open to new ideas. In other words. I know enough to know and I don't know all the answers, of course. The world is constantly changing, the pace of technology today is faster than it has ever been before and I think everybody would agree with that. So you can't sit there and think that whatever we were raised with is eternal. You know, I used to use a landline phone and then cell phones came out -- I went with that.

This interview was edited for length and clarity.