Queensland Labor MP Mark Bailey avoids criminal charges over deleted private email account

Updated

Queensland Labor MP Mark Bailey was "very foolish" for deleting his private email account, the chairman of the Crime and Corruption Commission has said.

But the CCC will not be taking criminal action against the Energy and Main Roads Minister after finding "no evidence" to suggest he wanted to "conceal corrupt conduct".

CCC chairman Alan MacSporran said he was sure Mr Bailey would not be deleting his private email account again — and nor would any of his Government colleagues.

"I'm sure Mr Bailey would be the first to say he's been very foolish," Mr MacSporran said.

"There's clearly no corrupt conduct visible in any of this but it was injudicious to deactivate an account even if there was nothing to hide.

"To behave that way you create a problem for yourself. So it's all self-inflicted and let's hope it won't happen again."

He said the CCC had better things to do than investigate such matters.

"It emphasises how foolish the behaviour is to use a private email account and then deactivate it," Mr MacSporran said.

"We don't shirk from our responsibility to be involved in these things but we have better things to do."

'I'm sincerely sorry'

Mr Bailey said he fully co-operated with the CCC and it was a relief that the matter was over.

"I accept that it was an error of judgement by me to delete my own private email account and I unreservedly apologise for doing so," he said.

"I met with the Premier this morning and I unreservedly apologised to her and she set out her expectations and her requirements of me returning to the ministry and I am revved up and ready to go.

"It was an error of judgment, I should have consulted with other people before I made the decision and I'm sincerely sorry for that."

Bailey resumes ministerial duties

Hours after the CCC announced its decision, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said Mr Bailey would return to duty as Minister for Main Roads, Road Safety and Ports, and Minister for Energy, Biofuels and Water Supply.

"Commissioner MacSporran stated that 'there was no basis to pursue criminal conduct against Mr Bailey for disposal of public records'," Ms Palaszczuk said.

"I would like to thank Treasurer Curtis Pitt and Minister Steven Miles for managing Mark Bailey's responsibilities since July."

Mr Bailey was stood down from his Cabinet post in July, after the CCC found a "reasonable suspicion of corrupt conduct" relating to the potential destruction of public records.

He closed his yahoo.co.uk account when The Australian newspaper made a right to information request to find out whether he was using the address to talk to union officials.

The matter was referred to the State Archivist, which handed its findings to the corruption watchdog on September 5.

The State Archivist found 1,199 records in the private email account that were considered public records, however they were not permanently deleted.

In a statement the CCC said: "Considering the public records contained in Mr Bailey's private email account were able to be recovered and have now been recovered with assistance from Mr Bailey, there has been no permanent disposal."

"Therefore there is no basis to pursue criminal conduct against Mr Bailey for the disposal of public records."

The CCC said the timing of Mr Bailey deactivating his private email account raised questions about his intentions, but it found "no evidence" to suggest he wanted to "conceal corrupt conduct".

Mr MacSporran has reiterated his "strong view" that it is undesirable for MPs to use private email accounts to conduct parliamentary business.

Ms Palaszczuk said her department had been working with the State Archivist to develop revised guidelines for management of public documents.

"The State Archivist in consultation with the CCC has advised that the new guidelines will not available until after the CCC has concluded its investigation," Ms Palaszczuk said.

"Now the investigation has been concluded, I have asked my department to work towards the soonest practical release of these guidelines."

Topics: law-crime-and-justice, state-parliament, corruption, alp, government-and-politics, internet-technology, brisbane-4000, qld, australia

First posted