Newcastle Jets are delighted to announce that the club has joined forces with prominent customer owned banking organisation the Greater Building Society for a major community partnership.

In a landmark agreement for both parties, The Greater has committed to be the major sponsor of the Jets’ new community engagement strategy and platform – to be known as ‘JETS: CONNECT’ – for the next two years.



JETS: CONNECT, fuelled by The Greater, will ensure that the club’s players, coaches, staff, and brand are highly visible in a variety of communities in and around Newcastle the Hunter and Northern New South Wales.



The JETS: CONNECT program will feature a pre-season tour, primary school visits, junior football clinics, and charitable components, sharpening the club’s focus and commitment in the community space.



This follows recent feedback from extensive engagement with Jets members and fans.



JETS: CONNECT will officially commence this month when the club’s senior squad and staff departs Newcastle on a six-day pre-season tour of Northern New South Wales.

From Monday 27 July to Saturday 1 August the Jets will visit several towns within the club’s northern catchment, including Taree, Port Macquarie, Coffs Harbour, Armidale and Tamworth.



At today’s JETS: CONNECT media launch at Hunter Stadium, Newcastle Jets Chief Executive Officer Mr Mitchell Murphy praised the Greater for believing in and backing the club’s community plan.

“The Greater is a highly recognised and respected organisation within Newcastle, the Hunter Valley and wider New South Wales,” Murphy said. “As a club we’re thrilled that The Greater have opted to share in our mission to positively influence people and their community’s through football.”

“Our members and supporters have certainly expressed their desire to see us be more active and visible in the community, and we’re confident that with The Greater’s support we will meet their wishes through our JETS: CONNECT platform.”

The Greater’s Acting CEO Greg Taylor says the JETS: CONNECT partnership aligns closely with The Greater’s core values.

“We are one of the largest banking organisations in Australia with a proud history of giving back to our community, not shareholders,” Mr Taylor said.

“The Greater shares the Jets’ values of being united with the community and acting with integrity in our dealings.

“Football is the number one participation sport in our region and we hope that our contribution will see the communities number one team connect even more closely with families, schools, local football clubs and charities.

“As a leading business in the Hunter we are privileged to do our part in making the Jets more accessible to the community, inspiring young boys and girls to be active,” he said.