It’s no secret that coke rap has been a pillar of Pusha T’s rap profile, but on his latest, Push proves that there’s more versatility in his pen.

With “Sunshine,” the closing track on King Push — Darkest Before Dawn: The Prelude, the newly appointed G.O.O.D. Music president ditches the drug talk and gets his Chuck D on by shinning more light on police brutality, racial profiling and the murders of young black men like Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Freddie Gray and Laquan McDonald.

“Still a target, but the badge is the new noose/Yeah, we all see it, but cellphones ain’t enough proof/So we still lose,” he raps, painting a painful picture.

“I don’t feel that there is any reason for a police officer to kill any unarmed individual,” Push told Genius in an interview session where he was annotating lyrics from his new album. “I’ll take it a step further, depending on what you are armed with as a police officer, there is still no reason to kill an individual who’s not armed with something as comparable to you and your gun.”

Pusha says that he doesn’t believe every police officer is bad, however. “Police would help my grandmother cross the street… And it made me feel good,” he defended. “But I am saying that we have seen it time and time again. We have the proof with the cellphones and how is it even a debate?”

By declaring the badge as the new noose, the veteran rapper draws a direct correlation to the history of black men and women who were lynched in United States. It’s an American horror that was supposed to end with the Civil Rights Act of 1965.

“It has not. Clearly,” Pusha answered when asked if he believed that America has moved past this type of institutional racism. “It ain’t even about my feelings. It’s just about what’s here.”

“Sunshine,” which features Jill Scott singing a soulful hook, is anchored by a frustrated Pusha T. “America you need a miracle,” he raps to start.

Then he goes on with more anger: “I don’t got no march in me, I can’t turn the other cheek.”

As personal as the record is for him, Pusha captures the spirit of the millions of people who have protested police brutality across the country over the past several years. It’s powerful, prolific and shows the depth of an MC who’s cocaine stigma doesn’t always tell the entire story.

“‘Sunshine’ is in the midst of everything that is going on in society,” he explained. “Police brutality. It wasn’t one particular incident. It has been a host of them.” —Rob Markman