I wasn’t hoping for luck to shine down; rather, just working hard, being prepared and ready so when something did inspire me I could grab it with both hands.

So Craig tell us about yourself…

My name is Craig Miller! I’m a 32 year old stunt performer from a small town called Greenock in Scotland’s West Coast.

I have been training a wide variety of martial arts relentlessly for almost 20 years now! It’s this passion for martial arts which took me across Asia training with the best. From Thailand’s top Muay Thai fighters at world renowned Fairtex, to the monks of the Shaolin monastery where I spent months living and training!

The journey took me to Hong Kong where I came across a stunt school called the Hithut. There I trained, qualified, and worked with such an amazing team. I have worked full time in the industry for over 6 years now.

My love of people and travel allowed me to network in Hong Kong where I met contacts from all over the world; and so, I travelled, working on some huge projects. I’ve worked in top American, British, Bollywood and of course local Hong Kong movies. I’ve also been in movies with world wide release such as ‘Dracula Untold’ and ‘Kingsman: The Secret Service.’

Was being a stunt man always something you aspired to be?

No, I never had a clue what to do with my life really. It was something I just happened across, which when I found out about it, I knew instantly this was for me. Previously, career wise, I had no idea! However, I knew I was passionate about martial arts and spent my whole time focused on that. I was also flexible and open to life and any opportunities that came my way and being out there in the world, just doing what I loved and living life my way. I wasn’t hoping for luck to shine down; rather, just working hard, being prepared and ready so when something did inspire me I could grab it with both hands.



I believe there is no such thing as luck. That is just a place where good preparation meets opportunity.

How did you manage to land your first job? Who you know or what you know?

A bit of both really. I believe there is no such thing as luck. That is just a place where good preparation meets opportunity. I was just training hard and took myself way out my comfort zone. I quit a good job that I had, travelled through Asia trying to learn, grow and expand to be the best I could be. Then, by luck, I came across some incredible people doing incredible things, things I knew I would love to do. After meeting and taking my opportunity, one thing led to another and after loads of hard work and sacrifice, here I am today!

What was that first job?

It was a local Hong Kong action movie in which the stunt team I was training with were in charge of the action. I played a drunk bar brawler and had fights with both leading actors. Of course I was the one who took the beating. Haha!

What’s the best part of being a stunt man?

For me, my passion is martial arts. Therefore having a career in which I get to utilise my passion; be creative and showcase that to the world, well that’s the best feeling ever.

On top of that, earning a living doing what I love most. I truly feel blessed and grateful everyday.

Also, of course it’s so much fun. I feel like I never have to grow up. I get to play soldiers, zombies, werewolves, good guys, bad guys, the lot. I run around fighting my friends; shooting guns, blowin’ shit up! That’s like every boy’s dream haha!

I get to play soldiers, zombies, werewolves, good guys, bad guys, the lot! I run around fighting my friends; shooting guns, blowin’ shit up! That’s like every boy’s dream haha!

What’s the funniest thing that has happened on set?

We always have such good fun on set. Pranking each other, joking and having a laugh. We can have very long hours so we have to have fun. However some fun times do stand out especially after a long night filming and spicy food for dinner.

We were shooting a scene where an SAS team was storming a building. We were hiding behind a corner where there’s nowhere to turn, and waiting for ‘action’ before the hard military team bust in and whoop ass. Well, one guy’s bowels got the better of him and after our spicy dinner those farts were foul!

Needless to say, after being stuck in that corner, Action was called and the team could not have stormed out of that room any faster to escape the stench!

There was also this one time where we were filming at night in an underground car park in London. Again, waiting on our cue to go. We were standing around in masks dressed as terrorist with full automatic weapons. Well, of course some poor passer-by thought something sinister was happening. Before we knew it, armed response unit arrived on the scene and things got real very fast. That certainly was an eventful evening!

We know you love being a stuntman but you’re dipping your toes in the water with acting now too aren’t you? What do you prefer?

Yes, over the last few years I have become more involved in the acting side of the game. I have done a few commercials etc. where I am the lead or the only talent that’s involved. I would love to do both for as long as I physically can, but stunts is my thing. Although sometimes it’s nice doing a job and not being a beaten mess after work haha.



For me every job is a blessing. I truly am grateful for it. However it’s such an incredible feeling that I can sit in the cinema either here in UK or Hong Kong and watch myself on the big screen and see the hard work paying off in the finished product.

Yes for sure! More so since I have travelled the world with it I would say I am more culturally aware than before. I meet so many incredible people along the way from all walks of life and shoot in some just breathtaking places. It does help you to grow as a person and appreciate everything that’s out there. I do try to always maintain the essence of me though, which are all about love, peace and inspiration. I’m forever grateful for these wonderful chances that come my way and the growing list of people who make it happen for me.Training for me is the most interesting part of it all. There are so many things I need to learn and absorb. There are so many disciplines that make up what I do and each job is different, so covering the spectrum as much as possible is essential. I have been training pretty much everyday for almost 20 years now. I rarely miss a day. Each day starts before 6 am and I train a minimum of 2, sometimes 3 sessions per day on different things. Each session can be anywhere from 1 hour to 3 hours!

What sort of Diet do you have/need? Are you regimented with it?

I do keep my diet very clean. I don’t follow any ‘diet’ in particular just keep eating as much real foods as possible. Health is essential for me because I don’t get sick pay and have to be available for jobs when they come up. Keeping a healthy clean diet (which keeps the abs ripping, added bonus) is a must! I stick to it meticulously, although, I do allow for a cheat day on Sundays.

What is the worst injury You’ve had?

Fortunately until now I have never had anything overly serious. Everyday we do fight scenes we are battered and bruised, we get sprains and twists etc., but that’s all part of the job. I trust the guys I work with fully with safety and we are all looking out for each other. I did a hospital run not too long ago when one of the guys landed on my leg during a fight and popped my knee. I struggled to walk for weeks but that’s the worst so far.

What’s been your proudest moment?

For me every job is a blessing. I truly am grateful for it. It’s such an incredible feeling to be able to sit in the cinema either here in UK or Hong Kong and watch myself on the big screen and see the hard work paying off in the finished product. Going to a red carpet grand opening for the movie ‘The White Storm’ in Hong Kong stands out. I was part of the action by playing a hired contract killer. Seeing it in the cinema with just all the cast and crew was a hugely proud moment.

We hear you might have some work with one of the biggest games producers in the world RockStar Games which is well known for the GTA franchise and many others. Is this true or just a rumour?

That is correct although I can’t say much. Motion capture is such a different and fun learning experience for me. I am having loads of fun adapting to this new challenge.

Check out Craig training in the video below, and look out for him on screen and *cough* on a famous video game soon!

[fbvideo link=”https://www.facebook.com/video.php?v=10203980184734565″ width=”500″ height=”400″ onlyvideo=”1″]