Frank Eudy's biggest fan walked out the front door Thursday night on Big Brother 18.

After the season 14 winner for "America's Favorite Houseguest" took Bridgette under his wing, the traveling nurse instantly became a target. Once that target started to fade away, she decided to flip the house in order to go against Paulie to evict Zakiyah. While Bridgette becoming bold with a big move impressed superfans, she was unfortunately sent packing soon after.

THR caught up with Bridgette to find out what she said to Paulie on the way out the door and which former player she wishes played the game this season.

Who do you hope doesn't go far in the game?

Paulie and Nicole.

What were you saying to Paulie as you were leaving the house and how do you hope it will impact his game?

I told Paulie he needs to cool it and be nice to Natalie. I had been telling him all morning what he said to her was inappropriate and I really hope Natalie is okay right now.

You are a fan of this game. If you could compare your game to a past player, who would it be and why?

I want to say Frank. In season 14, the whole house was against him from the beginning ... I felt very similar throughout the game.

If it weren’t Nicole, James, Frank and Da’Vonne, which four former players would you have liked to play the game with and why?

I would have loved to play the game with Donny [Thompson]. He’s got a heart of gold, I’ve always wanted to meet him, and I absolutely love honest, genuine people.

You missed Zingbot this season. Give us your best zing to three remaining houseguests.

James: Hey James, the diner down the street just named a pancake after you. Because of all your flip-flopping. Zing!

Nicole: Nicole, I heard they were throwing another parade for you… the featured float is a giant Corey and you get to hide right in his shadow. Zing!

Paulie: Hey Paulie, are you secretly a scuba diver? Because you’ve gone off the deep end. Zing!

Were you just starting to be a Bridgette fan before she was sent packing? Would Bridgette and Donny have been a solid alliance? Which houseguest would you zing? Give your best zing in the comments section below and stay tuned to The Live Feed for all things Big Brother.