The “Great Escape” of Philippine troops from Syrian rebels who had surrounded them in the Golan Heights and demanded their surrender is provoking a soul-searching review of the role of UN peace-keepers worldwide and the risks they take to carry out their missions.

At home, Philippine leaders have praised the refusal last week of the Filipino unit on the Golan Heights between Syria and Israel to lay down their arms as an act of heroism. Philippine leaders seem delighted with the performance of the 75 soldiers who escaped without a scratch after much criticism of the mediocrity of Philippine troops battling communist and Muslim guerrillas in their own country.

Did the top commander of what’s called the UN Disengagement Observer Force greet the Philippine contingent with cheers and maybe some medals?

Not likely. Instead Lieutenant General Iqbal Singh Singha, from the Indian army, rebuked them as “unprofessional” – even “cowardly.” Their offense: they violated his order to yield to the rebels as part of a grand bargain for winning freedom for 43 Fijian army soldiers, also part of the UN force, who had given up right away to rebel demands.

The question Filipinos and others are asking is why arm military peace-keepers if they’re supposed to surrender whenever surrounded by seemingly superior forces. While UN peace-keepers are not expected to risk their lives, do they have an obligation to remain firm in the face of importunate demands simply to give up?

Those are questions that the Philippines foreign affairs secretary, Albert del Rosario, is asking UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. The foreign secretary in a letter to Ban cited rules of engagement that he said gave members of the UN force in the Golan Heights the “inherent right to defend themselves” while having “to struggle to meet the demands of the challenge” posed by the Syrian rebels.

The UN, said del Rosario, needs to “revisit the outstanding operational and tactical issues including the UN’s command and control” versus “the safety and security of peacekeepers during kidnapping and siege incidents…..” At stake, he said, was “the accountability of UN peacekeeping mission leaders for decisions made during crisis operations as well as the contingency plans and procedures to address these situations.”

The formally polite tone of the message scarcely hides the outrage of Philippine leaders over the seemingly bizarre request by General Singha for what Philippine officials believe would have been abject surrender.

Singha severely offended the Filipinos by saying it was “an act of cowardice to desert posts especially when a delicate ceasefire was in place." His argument was the Filipinos had to stay where they were during talks to obtain freedom for the Fijians, who remain in rebel hands.

The commander of the Philippine armed forces, General Gregorio Pio Catapang Jr., charged that Singha wanted his troops to surrender their arms as the Fijians had done. UN peacekeeping officials say, however, that the Filipinos were not ordered to give up their weapons – just not to use them against the rebels.

That’s a distinction that just about everyone with any influence in the Philippines sees as absurd. While 35 Filipino troops in one position managed to get out without firing a shot, 40 more exchanged intermittent rifle fire with the rebels for several hours before managing to escape.

Philippine politicos universally praised the performance of the Philippine troops after Singha charged “the non-professional actions of the Filipino troops have endangered the lives of the Fijian soldiers.”

Philippine Senator Paolo Benigno Aquino, nephew of President Benigno Aquino III, introduced a resolution in the Senate extolling the escape as a great moment in modern Philippine history. Senator Aquino is a grandson and President Aquino a son of Benigno Aquino, the politician whose assassination as he was returning to Manila from the U.S. precipitated the "People Power" revolution against long ruling Ferdinand Marcos and the election of President Aquino's mother, Corazon Aquino, as president in 1986.

“After withstanding seven hours under heavy fire,” said Senator Aquino's resolution, the Filipino peacekeepers, “low on ammunition, successfully planned and implemented their escape on the night of 30 August 2014 under cover of darkness…” He credited just about every conceivable agency for providing “guidance and support,” including Philippine military and defense leaders, the UN force headquarters and the Syrian, Israeli, UN and Qatar governments.

“Burdened with heavy weapons and the cold weather,” said the resolution, “they walked for nearly two yours to meet up with other UN forces who escorted them to safety.”

Other senators jumped in with their own words of praise. One of them, Jinggoy Estrada, in jail for “plunder” of public funds, saw the “brave act” as showing “our commitment to international peace and our continuing quest to achieve unity among nations.”

In fact, however, the whole episode raises questions about the role of more than 1,200 peacekeepers from six nations in keeping the peace along a desolate 70-kilometer stretch where they’ve been safeguarding a ceasefire in place since 1974 that ended the 1973 war between Israel and Arab nations, including Syria.

The rise in rebel strength and their takeover of wide swaths of territory in both Syria and Iraq, say some observers, means the UN peacekeepers face such risks as to render their mission irrelevant if not useless.