I can have days when I do not know what to put on a plate. It is not always easy thinking about food. So I was struggling with what to make with chicken the other day and I was already peeling the second potato to make baked potatoes and I thought that I could make a potato salad.

I made it a bit different from like it is supposed to be. First of all I don’t use mayonnaise, hardly eat it at all. I rather use yogurt instead. It makes the salad more light and refreshing and a bit sour. I also use a couple more vegetables than just a potato and onion. I added a tomato, red pepper and cucumber for more diversity. It is so simple to make and very delicious and also healthy. You need to cook the potatoes with the skin on because this makes a great flavor and the skin goes off so easy when cooked, just make sure you put some water on them and not let them dry out and it will peel right off. And let the salad sit in a refrigerator a bit, so it is nice and cold and it will go great with a piece of meat or even by itself. Hope you enjoy it..;)

Ingredients

350 grams of spring potato (around 5 pieces)

1 medium tomato

1 small red pepper

1 medium cucumber

1 small red onion

180 grams of regular yogurt

Salt

Black pepper

1 table-spoon of apple vinegar

Directions

Wash the potatoes and put it in hot water and cook for round 20 minutes until they are cooked. You can stick your fork in the middle of one, and if it goes off easy it is cooked. In the mean time you can prepare other vegetables. Peel the onion and cucumber and slice onion very thinly and cucumber on squares. Wash the tomato and red pepper and slice them to squares and put all the veggies in a salad bowl and in a refrigerator to get cooled. When potato is cooked, you can rinse it under cold water and let it cool down for a couple of minutes, then peel the skin off and cut it to squares and add it to the veggies. Add also the yogurt and all the seasoning (salt, black pepper and vinegar) and mix. You can let it sit in a refrigerator if it needs to be colder or you can serve it.

Time – 45 minutes

Category – easy

Quantity – 2 servings