What can be wrong with giving scholarships to the meritorious? A meritorious society is a just society, right? Giving money according to “worth” seems way better, ethically, than giving to the well-connected, or to those of a favored race or religion, right?

Well, maybe. But then again, sometimes maybe not.

The problem of law school merit scholarships is a complicated and nuanced one, especially for those who have not considered it at length. In brief, here are five background points underlying the ethical conundrum I will subsequently sketch out:

Law Schools, like car dealerships, have list prices for their wares. Tuition charges for all law schools must be stated on their web sites and in their written materials, pursuant to regulators’ (ABA, AALS) requirements. There must be some silly people out there who pay list price for their cars, I suppose, and there are certainly people who pay full tuition under the impression that that’s what everyone pays. But in reality not everyone pays list price, and those who have done so are quickly disabused when they arrive at 1L. Law Schools always want to attract the “best” students, and one way to attract them is to price discriminate, i.e., to offer discounts from list. “Best,” of course, is a concept with many possible denotations, and in days of yore American law schools tended to have diverse understandings of it. Today, though, U.S. News and World Report rankings are so influential tha they have become the cart driving the law school admissions horse. USNWR has homogenized our understanding of student value – Law School Admissions Test scores and undergraduate Grade Point Averages are the measures of student excellence. The higher the median LSAT and GPA scores of the admitted student body, the higher a law school’s ranking will be (the two factors combined account for 22.5% of a school’s ranking), and the higher the ranking, ceteris paribus, the better will be the jobs offered to graduates, the better paid will be its alumni base, the better will be the faculty lured to work there, and the better will be the students enticed to apply there. Rising ranking thus stimulates a “virtuous circle” while falling ranking leads to a “vicious circle” that, if left unattended, can result what some fear to be a “death spiral.” Buying better students is one attempt to move from a vicious circle to a virtuous one. Today, law jobs are quite hard to come by for many law school grads, and law school tuition as risen so high during the boom years that many grads are saddled with student loans they have great difficulty repaying. Bankruptcy is not normally available to discharge student loan debt. So minimizing student loans through discounts from tuition list price is a high priority for law school applicants. In our increasingly meritorious nation, the cream has often already risen to the top. The wealthy tend to be smarter and better educated than the poorer – and they tend to have children who are smarter and better educated than are the children of poorer parents.

These five factors play out in predictable ways. At super-elite law schools (Yale/Harvard/Stanford, etc.), virtually all students have stellar LSAT and GPA scores. Those with such scores are willing to pay list price for the experience, the contacts and the credential these Brahmin schools provide – and these schools can therefore eliminate merit scholarships and admit selectively based on criteria other than LSAT and GPA. [Did you rise from humble beginnings? Did you overcome your physical handicap and climb Everest, writing a Pulitzer-winning account of your exploit?] But at most schools, merit scholarships will be offered to the high LSAT and GPA scorers among applicants to that school. Most schools must pay to lure those scorers away from other, equally or possibly higher-ranked schools that are bidding for their attendance. And those merit scholars will tend to be more intelligent and from tonier zip codes than lower-ranked admittees to the same law school.

One key additional fact bears mention now. It is far from irrational for USNWR to use median LSAT and GPA to rank schools. Student LSAT and GPA scores are, unsurprisingly, significantly correlated with law school performance. So it’s meaningful to say that the student body at a higher ranked school tends to be “better” than the student body at a lower-ranked school. Employers can use school rank as a proxy in making employment decisions – schools are a convenient aggregation of students of a given talent level. That’s how the virtuous (or vicious, as the case may be) snowball starts rolling.

The upshot of all this is that, at most law schools, price discrimination results in poorer, less well-educated students “subsidizing” (paying higher tuition than) richer, better-educated students. For their subsidy, poorer students are penalized a second time at graduation – because the subsidized richer students will tend to finish at the top of the class and get better paying jobs, while the poorer students will find it harder and harder to find employment to pay for their higher student loans. Thus are “list price” payers made to seem to be chumps over and over again, while the recipients of merit scholarships laugh, as it were, all the way to the bank.

This looks in many ways like a classic regressive tax.

What should be done about this? That’s not clear – it’s not self-evident that merit scholarships are “unfair” or “racist” or “classist”, even if merit scholarship recipients tend to be from tonier zip codes and of paler hues. Results don’t correlate with motives. But the results are regressive, it seems, and if regressivity is itself justification for reform, a second question arises:

What can be done?

As indicated above, the Yales of this world offer essentially no merit scholarships – they attract LSAT and GPA studs willing to pay list price. Their scholarships are need-based, so redistribution tends to be from haves to have-nots. At the other end of the USNWR spectrum, University of La Verne College of Law in California just announced that, like certain innovative car dealerships, it will charge the same non-negotiable “discounted” price to all matriculants. Merit scholarships are out at La Verne, and instead of a list price of $39,900 replete with heavy price discrimination, all new matriculants will pay $25K. It’s “as if” every student got a $15K scholarship, if you will – though in reality the "discounted" price is an indication of the extent of prior price discrimination.

La Verne is a lowest-tier USNWR school, recently provisionally re-accredited after being denied full ABA accreditation, and it is unlikely that it attracted many high-scoring LSAT and GPA stars while price discriminating. Perhaps La Verne has little to lose and much to gain in PR benefits from its new, “fairer” tuition system. But can La Verne’s fixed-price model spread to higher ranked schools? That will be hard to do because of collective action problems – for fixed-price law schools risk losing their best students to rival schools that continue to price discriminate. Rationally, the temptation is to continue to impose the regressive tax.

For those who believe this to be ethically problematic, outside intervention may be needed to solve what is essentially a Prisoners’ Dilemma. The ABA might, for instance, ban merit scholarships at accredited schools. US News and World Report might cease using student LSAT and GPA scores in law school rankings. Will these things happen? Count me doubtful. If USNWR abandoned LSAT and GPA, a rival publication would spring up and take its place. And the ABA seems hardly likely to resist pressures by firms that are anxious to use law schools as selection proxies in their hiring process.

Law professors are, for the most part, lawyers, and we are bound ethically to make access to our profession accessible to qualified and interested people. Have we done this by setting up a system that transfers resources from the more to the less needy? If so, perhaps we need to rethink what we are doing. Or should we stick our heads in the sand and forget about this whole problem – after all, LSAT test taker numbers are finally increasing again, right? What, us worry?

As always, your comments are welcome. Contact me at mkrauss at gmu dot edu.