Amanda Clarke and Victoria Grayson will go one final round in the Revenge series finale. The ABC soap is ending after a sure-to-be-epic showdown in the season 4 finale, and Us Weekly has a sneak peek at the women facing off in the episode.

"For you, death is my only true revenge," Amanda (Emily VanCamp) hisses at Victoria Grayson (Madeline Stowe) while aiming a gun at her sworn enemy. The elder Hamptonite was presumed dead after framing Amanda for her murder, but is, in fact, very much alive — and unafraid of death.

PHOTOS: TV shows gone too soon

"I died long before you were born. This is just a formality," Victoria says. "Are you ready now?"

Amanda ominously responds, "More than you know. Goodbye, Victoria."

Dun dun dun! Things aren't looking good for the two rivals, and executive producer Sunil Nayar told Us Weekly ahead of the finale that nothing will be the same for either woman if they make it out alive.

"Is this a woman that is able to shake off the shackle of what her mission has been? Should she survive, what is that survival going to look like? Because I think there’s no way to get out of this untainted," the showrunner dished of Amanda/Emily's potential fate.

PHOTOS: The most shocking TV deaths ever

The finale will focus on "the idea that each character, in some form or another, gets their moment of redemption and destruction," he continued. "What is the collateral of what’s happened to all those people? I think we’ve answered those questions very elegantly and in a lot of times very surprisingly in the finale."

PHOTOS: Emily VanCamp and Josh Bowman's real-life love story

Of course, the Grayson/Clarke rivalry will take center stage. "The show is Victoria and Emily," Nayar said. And as for Victoria, "[the Victoria vs. Emily] dynamic is the lifeblood of the show, and I think the work [Stowe] did this year was exceptional. You’ll see where Victoria’s story ends up next week but it is the right ending."

The Revenge series finale airs Sunday, May 10 at 10 p.m. ET on ABC.

Sign up now for the Us Weekly newsletter to get breaking celebrity news, hot pics and more delivered straight to your inbox!

Want stories like these delivered straight to your phone? Download the Us Weekly iPhone app now!