in October 2014 after videos of the acts were found

She will also serve time for stabbing someone with a fork and biting a child

She was let off with

The young woman who had sex with a dog three times to 'arouse' her partner has been let off on probation after the court heard she told a psychologist: 'This has ruined my life'.

Jenna Louise Driscoll, a 27-year-old Brisbane waitress, choked back tears as a District Court judge handed down a probation order for charges including bestiality.

The frizzy-haired waitress breathed a huge sigh of relief upon learning she would walk free.

Jenna Louise Driscoll, 27, was let off with a suspended sentence for bestiality at the Brisbane District Court in Queensland on Monday (pictured at hearing last Friday)

'Your conduct in the bestiality offences was repugnant,' Judge Terry Martin said.

She had sex with the pitbull terrier on three occasions - in January, March and April of 2014.

Videos of the appalling acts were found on her phone by police while she was being investigated for drug trafficking.

In his sentencing, the judge said it seemed the bestiality occurred 'in the context of your partner wanting to be aroused by watching such appalling conduct'.

'You were clearly a willing participant in acts of sexual intercourse with the dog,' he said.

Driscoll was formally charged in 2014 after police found videos of her having sex with a dog

Driscoll was, however, convicted of stabbing a woman with a fork and biting a child, causing minor injuries.

She was also handed a two-and-a-half-year suspended jail sentence for drug trafficking, which she 'used to pay the rent and other living expenses'.

Her lawyers had argued she had suffered from the publicity of her crimes - providing the court with news articles and a list of Google links.

The defence also referred to the case of Harriet Wran - the daughter of a former New South Wales premier - where a judge considered the effect of huge media attention.

The Brisbane woman spent the weekend behind bars after pleading guilty to three bestiality charges and other matters

But Judge Martin had little sympathy, telling the fidgety redhead: 'The adverse publicity is a result of your conduct'.

The judge said Driscoll had a dysfunctional childhood and was subjected to physical and emotional abuse growing up.

The court heard she was studying the Year 12 to improve her lot in life.

Judge Martin told the court she 'may or may not' be remorseful over her actions but a jail sentence could see her exposed to 'corrupting influence'.

'This has ruined my life. I very much regret what I've done,' Driscoll said in a psychologist's report read out in court.

She was also described as extremely embarrassed, anxious and depressed in the report.

Driscoll had pleaded guilty to all charges.

She had been charged after police discovered three videos of her having inappropriate sexual contact with the dog

Under the order, she will have to undergo regular drug tests and must abstain from using illicit substances.

Driscoll had spent the weekend behind bars while Judge Martin considered his sentence, but not before branding her acts ‘repulsive’ and ‘against the order of nature’.

Driscoll appeared in court on Monday afternoon wearing dark glasses, a grey top and skirt.