Fact Buster

Q: Does coffee make you dehydrated?

A: If you drink coffee regularly and don't drink too much it shouldn't dehydrate you.

Our expert: Dietitian Lisa Renn



[Image source: Reuters | Mick Tsikas ]

Have your say Have you found coffee can make you feel dehydrated?

Conditions of Use

Have you been told that you need to drink an extra glass of water for every cup of coffee or tea that you drink?

For some time there has been a belief that drinking coffee and tea can make you dehydrated because the caffeine they contain has a diuretic effect. (A diuretic is a substance that causes your body to produce urine, and it has been suggested caffeine can do this because it increases blood flow through the kidneys.)

But is there any evidence to show that your morning cuppa needs to be offset with a big glass of water?

If you regularly enjoy a few cups of coffee or tea a day, then you can rest assured the moderate amount of caffeine they contain doesn't cause you to lose more fluid than you ingest, says Lisa Renn, accredited practising dietitian and spokesperson for the Dietitians Association of Australia.

Nor will your cuppa be any more likely to send you off to the loo than any other drink.

"There is evidence that caffeine in higher amounts acts as a diuretic in some people, but moderate intake is actually not that significant," Renn says.

A recent UK study of regular male coffee drinkers found no difference in hydration levels between those who drank four 200ml cups of coffee a day and those who drank the same amount of water.

Researchers measured the men's urine output over a 24-hour period and other hydration markers in their blood, and concluded moderate coffee intake provides similar hydrating qualities to water.

While the study focused on the intake of coffee, those who drink tea can also take heart from the results as it contains similar amounts of caffeine to coffee.

It's worth noting, the study involved men who were regular coffee drinkers – and it's been suggested coffee may have more of a diuretic effect on those who do not habitually consume caffeine because they haven't developed a tolerance to caffeine. But so far the evidence on this point isn't completely clear.

How caffeine affects hydration

One of the reasons that drinks containing caffeine, such as coffee, tea, chocolate, cola drinks and energy drinks, have been given such a bad rap over the years is because caffeine is a diuretic when consumed in large doses (more than 500mg).

Diuretics make your body produce more urine, so not only do they have you running to the toilet more often, they also cause you to lose sodium and water. When you lose too much sodium and water you become dehydrated, and this can have an effect on a range of bodily functions – from temperature control to absorption of food.

However, the amount of caffeine you get in a cuppa is unlikely to have these effects and it can actually contribute to your overall daily fluid intake.

"If you have to have more than four cups of coffee a day you may see a diuretic effect from that, but if your intake is less, then from a dehydration view you're going to be okay," says Renn.

Men's bodies need around 2.6 litres and women's around 2.1 litres of water a day, but this can be gleaned from a range of food and drinks other than water, including coffee and tea.

"Certainly you can be interspersing coffees and waters throughout the day, so you might have a bottle of water with you and be sipping on that most of the time, and then you might have a coffee in your break times," Renn says.

The good and bad sides of coffee

It's worth noting there are also other side effects associated with caffeinated drinks, which include:

rapid heart beat (palpitations)

restlessness and excitability

anxiety and irritability

trembling hands

sleeplessness.

And if you are drinking coffees with lots of milk it may affect your weight.

"Lattes and cappuccinos can make an excellent dairy-based or soy-based snack, but if you're having lots of those throughout the day, especially if you're trying to lose weight and having four milk coffees a day, it's going to impact on your calorie intake," Renn says.

However, drinking coffee can also have a range of health benefits, and has been linked to decreased risk of some cancers, heart disease and type 2 diabetes.

"Coffee is certainly not the evil we once thought it was, but it's that old adage of everything in moderation," says Renn.

For more on caffeine, it's side effects and benefits see our Caffeine fact file.