This is the bizarre moment an Asian woman praised Pauline Hanson by comparing her to both Donald Trump and Adolf Hitler.

The woman's gushing praise of the controversial One Nation leader was captured in an interview with ABC's The Link presenter Stan Grant.

He spoke to residents of New South Wales in a segment that aired on Friday night asking them what they think of Ms Hanson.

While one man dismissed her as 'too anti-everything,' an Asian woman – who was not named – was filmed in a shopping centre as she heaped praise on Senator Hanson.

This woman heaped praise Pauline Hanson in an interview with The Link - comparing her to Donald Trump and Adolf Hitler

'Pauline Hanson is straightforward,' she said.

'She's sincere, she's not a hypocrite. If she doesn't like you, I don't like you.'

The woman continued to compliment Ms Hanson by comparing her qualities with two other nationalistic politicians she admires - the current President of the United States and the leader of Nazi Germany.

Speaking about why she likes Ms Hanson, the woman continued: 'Just like Trump. I like Trump. Donald Trump is sincere.

'He's sincere, straightforward. If he tells you you're not okay, you're not okay – not okay for America. You're destroying our country.'

The unnamed woman described the One Nation leader as 'sincere' and 'straightforward'

While some called Ms Hanson (pictured) 'too anti-everything', the woman continued to compliment her

Asked if she would like to hear more Trump-inspired rhetoric in Australia, she replied: 'Yes, yes.'

She added: 'See like that speech he had yesterday, that was great. Yes, it sounded like Hitler, but you know, Hitler loved Germany.'

Later on the programme, American political analyst and author Thomas Frank said the woman's comments were 'alarming'.

'Oh my goodness, well, it sounds like you're going to get your own Donald Trump here soon,' he told Mr Grant.

'That's a little bit alarming.

'Everything those people said, you take out the accent and some of the slang and that's exactly the kind of thing you heard from Americans during the last election cycle.'

The woman compared Ms Hanson to other nationalistic politicians Donald Trump (pictured left) and Adolf Hitler (right)

Ms Hanson has said that Australians are calling out for a 'strong leader' like Vladimir Putin

Meanwhile, Ms Hanson herself recently praised a controversial leader – Russian President Vladimir Putin.

She insisted that Australians are calling out for a 'strong leader' like Putin in an interview on Insiders.

'I listened to a speech he gave in Parliament,' she told Insiders host Barrie Cassidy.

'Even the people here in Australia were saying, 'I wish we had a leader like that here, I wish someone would stand up and fight for this country.'

'That's what people expect.'