The moose on the now eight-hour loose in Markham is believed to be taking a nap, although Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry staff and police tracking the animal don’t know for sure. But the trackers, themselves, have turned in for the night. The York Regional police and MNRF staff have been following the lost animal by way of drone since around 10:30 a.m. on Friday, with the hopes of tranquilizing it and returning it to the wild.

The moose put in a guest appearance in many surprising places.

But as day turned to night, officials decided to call it a day because they felt attempting to tranquilize the moose in the dark was not a good idea. “It’s too dangerous,” said Jolanta Kowalski, with the MNRF. “We haven’t seen the moose for several hours. I think the last time anyone saw (it) moving was around 3 p.m.” Attempts to locate the moose depend on any sightings through the night, said Kowalski. “In the event that someone sees it running around, we can go in and begin our search again.”

Article Continued Below

Kowalski added that she hopes the creature has just fallen asleep, or even better “has found its way back from where it came.” The moose was last seen in the area of Kennedy Rd. and 16th Ave. Since its appearance in the morning, the animal could be seen on CP24 TV as filmed by the station’s helicopter which followed it close above, as the beast barreled over suburban backyards and front lawns. The moose even ventured onto major roadways. Perhaps seeking refuge, the animal made its way to the Rouge River area, said Sgt. Kerry Schmidt of the Ontario Provincial police at around 11:30 a.m. Both the ministry and police asked the public to keep their distance.

“We need people to back off. Let us know if they see it — but stop chasing it,” said Sgt. Scott Hunter at the time. Kowalski said the ministry asked CP24 to stop hovering near the moose with its helicopter because the noise was likely agitating it.

Article Continued Below

“It needs the space to calm down and relax.” No injuries were reported, but Hunter said the moose’s run had caused several car accidents, broken windows and smashed fences over the course of the day. Moose can run at speeds of 50 km/h. “It needs to rest or it’s going to die,” Hunter said.

Read more about: