Attention! This news was published on the old version of the website. There may be some problems with news display in specific browser versions.

Thunder League Division Structure

Dear players! You have become acquainted with the Thunder League and watched some of the matches by the pro division teams. Your participation in the league events and the purchasing of League “Dog tags” has made it possible to increase the prize pool of the pro division. We thank you for your support with the eSports development in the game!

The time has come for our supporters to become participants - gather your teams and start to make your way to the top of the Thunder League - to the pro division!

The Qualifying tournament starts on February 2016

We announce two more divisions in the league:

Novice Division – a division for the novice teams.

Semi Pro Division – medium division.

Semi Pro Division will be established after the qualifying Novice Division tournament, where all the Squadrons may participate.

Rules of the qualifiers:

Tournament format: 7 vs 7.

Mode: realistic with markers for both sides.

A match means a single battle between two Squadrons on a random map in [Domination] mode.

Two respawns are available in every match.

Players in a team can choose any vehicles from those that the arbiters have authorised.

The best 24 Squadrons will be able to name 9 participants for the final group qualifying tournament. You can see the tournaments regulations here.

6 qualifying groups (4 teams per group) will determine 12 teams (2 best teams per group) and thus they will form the Semi Pro Division.

After the Semi Pro Division qualifiers we will run the first season.

First season rules:

The team that took 1st place qualifies for the Pro Division.

The team that took 2nd place will have a play-off match against the team that came 9th in the Pro-Division.

The teams that took 9th to 12th position, will have a play-off round against the best 4 teams in the Novice Division before the second season of the League.

Once the first season is over there will be no more final qualifying tournaments. Thus we will make the structure for the Thunder League, which will have constant rotation between the divisions.

Good luck in the future battles!

Index.

Structure of the groups to qualify for the Semi Pro Division after the Novice Division results (numbers mean place taken in the qualifier).

Group A Group B Group C Group D Group E Group F 1 2 3 4 5 6 12 11 10 9 8 7 18 17 16 15 14 13 24 23 22 21 20 19

Don’t know what the Thunder League is? Check WARTHUNDER.PRO​

Join the league by purchasing “Dog Tags”!