Following a monster sophomore campaign at Cartersville High School in Georgia that saw him pass for 3,655 yards and 43 touchdowns, Trevor Lawrence keeps his spot as the No. 1 player in the nation and headlines Thursday’s unveiling of the first full Top247 for the 2018 class.

With the release, we have a starting point for the names to know among the nation's top soon-to-be juniors.

CLICK HERE FOR THE TOP247!

The list will change; it will evolve, prospects will drop and new names will emerge but at this early stage in the recruiting process, it's time to recognize the players that have already caught the collective eye of the college recruiting world.

THE FIVE-STARS

There are four initial five-stars in the Top247 for 2018:

1. Trevor Lawrence, QB, Georgia – A quarterback with a shot to go wire-to-wire as the nation's top ranked prospect. He checks every box: Size, arm-strength, athleticism, productivity. His recruitment looks like a Georgia-Tennessee battle.

2. Brey Walker, OT, Oklahoma – He's what offensive tackles look like in cartoons. A freak of a body at 6-foot-6 and 290 pounds who is also one of the nation's top heavyweight wrestlers. He's already committed to Oklahoma.

RELATED: Walker among a few players in the hunt for Lawrence's top spot

3. Zamir White, RB, North Carolina – Whatever you want a running back to be, this kid can be it. A big, powerful back with speed, White has 20 offers but is high on Clemson and North Carolina at the moment.

4. Xavier Thomas, DE, South Carolina – The game-changing edge rusher that every defense is looking for. Thomas is ready to carry the torch for the defensive line tradition in the Carolinas for the 2018 cycle.

TEAM RANKINGS SHUFFLE

Based on the new grades handed out within the Top247 and beyond, Miami is clearly building a special class. Mark Richt has locked up three Top247 prospects in cornerbacks Josh Jobe and Gilbert Frierson and wide receiver Daquris Wiggins. The Hurricanes have two more committed from outside the Top247 in all-purpose back Jalen Patterson and cornerback Thomas Burns.

RELATED: Gallery of legacy 2018 recruits

Miami's haul of three Top247 prospects is tops. Three teams, all from the SEC, have two Top247 pledges. Alabama has the two highest rated prospects in tight end Macom Epps and offensive tackle Dare Rosenthal.

LSU's two Top247 prospects are both homegrown talents in wide receiver Devonta Jason and cornerback Kelvin Joseph.

Luke Matthews, the son of NFL Hall of Famer Bruce Matthews, makes it a fourth son to play for the Aggies. His older brother, Jake, was drafted sixth overall by the Atlanta Falcons in 2014. Luke joins wide receiver Montel Parker as the two Texas A&M commits on the list.

POISED FOR BIG YEARS

- It's a good time to be arriving at South Carolina if you're Will Muschamp. The Carolinas are loaded with talent in 2018 and Muschamp looks poised to benefit from it. So too will Clemson, North Carolina, NC State and the other regional recruiters. Between the states of North Carolina and South Carolina, there are 18 combined Top247 members.

- LSU could be poised for a run at a recruiting national title based on its in-state talent to pull from. While the class doesn’t have any no-doubt five-star types yet, Louisiana looks to be loaded with depth in that mid four-star range. Fifteen four-stars in the Top247 are from Louisiana and the Tigers already have two of them committed.

- Pennsylvania is also trending up in 2018. There are nine Pennsylvanians represented in the Top247. James Franklin and Penn State are looking to capitalize on that talent by landing an early commitment form the state's top player, Micah Parsons. Can Pittsburgh do the same by keeping local gun-slinger Phil Jurkovec at home despite Notre Dame and Ohio State overtures?

CLICK HERE FOR THE TOP247!