Although my wife and I have taken several trips together since getting married, we still haven’t gone on an official honeymoon. My old job required me to work weekends and I couldn’t take any time off around the date of our wedding ceremony, so I was back in the office two days after saying “I do.”

As such, my wife and I didn’t get to do the typical newlywed travel activities. You know, things like toasting each other with champagne every night for a week, lounging on the beach and giggling as we call each other Mr. and Mrs. Baseel, or beating the hell out of a convenience store clerk, like the Chinese newlyweds who are not only just married, but were also just arrested in Japan.

On the morning of Saturday, September 26, a pair of newlywed Chinese nationals, the groom 36 and the bride 25, walked into a convenience store in the Chuo Ward of Sapporo, the largest city on Japan’s northern island of Hokkaido. Apparently craving a post-breakfast treat, they grabbed a package of ice cream from the cooler box, opened it up, and started munching away on it in the store.

Unless you’re the Dalai Lama, however, Japanese convenience stores prefer you pay for the merchandise before you start consuming it. When the 24-year-old Japanese male clerk who was on-duty spotted what the couple was doing, he gestured for them to leave the store. It’s unclear whether he first tried to speak to the couple in Japanese, or why he gestured for them to leave the store instead of pay for their ice cream. What is clear, though, is that the couple responded by punching him in the face, kicking him, and grabbing his hair.

While two-on-one-ing a common opponent with that move set will get you a high score in Double Dragon, it’s generally frowned upon in the real world of inexpensive snack commerce. The police were called, arrived to find the assault ongoing, and promptly arrested the pair. The husband, who told the authorities he is a banker from Shanghai and that he and his wife are on their honeymoon in Japan, said that he felt the clerk was being disrespectful, giving his statement as “I thought my wife was being insulted. It is true that I hit him.”

The pair remain in police custody, and now face the possibility of having to downgrade from convenience store sweets to the subpar desserts served by the Japanese penal system’s correctional facilities.

Source: Sankei News

Top image: Wikipedia/Kuha455405