(I received a copy of this book from the author in exchange for my review)



This is an absolutely fantastic book! And I DO NOT give out praise like that all willy nilly. I immensely enjoyed reading Vision and am so glad I was given a chance to review it. So, a BIG thanks to the authors!

I was not quite sure what to expect when I agreed to review this novel. The synopsis intrigued me and I was interested to see how the authors had chosen to portray demons. There are a lot of different takes on demons and for the most part I am not that fond of them as a subject for a book. However, Cathy and Galen changed my mind with this one. The demons in this book do have a supernatural element to them but they are more than that.

To me they seemed to be depicted as the negative subconscious thoughts that tend to plague humans. That voice that encourages defeat and lack of confidence when life seems to be dragging you down.

However, Vision is not so much about the demons, as it is about the main character and what she can do in her life because she can see them. This book was original and had a wonderful story line. I like books with a message and this one really stood out to me.

I enjoyed Maddies' character. She is strong and determined and most importantly, she has hope. She never gives up on Cassie, which is something I so admired about her. She portrays a friend anyone would be lucky to have. I enjoyed the development of her character as the story progressed and am so glad that she eventually found her voice.

Music is a huge part of this book and really made the story special. I enjoyed all the references to music artists and even looked some of them up.

Vision had a perfect ending. It kind of makes your heart swell at the last page. I don't want to give it away, so I am not going to say anything more.

This book has a great pace and I was hooked from the first chapter. I told myself I was only going to read the first fifty pages, but the story compels you to read on. I ended up not moving from my spot until I was finished. It was one of those situations where you have to know what is going to happen next.

I am highly recommending this book to all readers. If you are looking for something different that also happens to be a page turner, read this book!