In California, where there are nine festivals devoted to lavender alone, you’re never far from something that needs celebrating. But sometimes an event or theme or setting is so attractive, you might want to make a weekend or even a week of it. Here are 10 in 2018 worth a look.

Mendocino Crab, Wine and Beer Festival: This scenic hamlet on the north coast draws visitors with a variety of festivals throughout the year, but its crab fest is one of the best of its kind, thanks to its all-you-can-eat cioppino and crab feeds, a crab-cake cook-off and the area’s excellent local wines and beer. www.mendocino.com (Jan. 19-28)

ScotsFestival on the Queen Mary: When you remember that Mary was Queen of Scots, it’s obvious why the famed ship, built on the bonny banks of the River Clyde and now permanently moored in Long Beach, is home to the state’s most unusual gathering of the clans. Expect all the usual competitions, music, games, haggis-eating and whisky-tasting opportunities, plus a Robert Burns Supper. www.queenmary.com (Tentative dates: Feb. 17-18)

Palm Springs Modernism Week: What began as a single showcase now draws lovers of midcentury-modern architecture, design and culture from around the world for 10 days of activities that include film screenings, lectures, symposiums, art events, home tours, martini parties and even an ode to the beloved Airstream travel trailer. Sign up early enough and you can rent a gem of a private midcentury home. www.modernismweek.com (Feb. 15-25)

Like our Facebook page for more conversation and news coverage from San Jose, the Bay Area and beyond.

Pebble Beach Food and Wine: This is the younger sister of Aspen’s famous signature culinary festival, but with even better wine. Set on one of the most prestigious stretches of coastline in the country, the event draws thousands to sample offerings by more than 100 celebrity chefs and 250 wineries. Enjoy culinary demos, grand tastings, special events — such as last year’s Southern Breakfast with Hugh Acheson — while taking in sumptuous views. www.pbfw.com (April 5-8)

Paso Robles Wine Festival: Anchored in the Downtown City Park, with additional events hosted by wineries in the nearby rolling hills, this four-day eating and sipping extravaganza includes winemaker dinners, live music and barrel tastings. Buy tickets to the Grand Tasting early. www.pasowine.com. (May 17-20).

Valhalla Renaissance Faire: Renaissance fairs can be found closer to home, but why not hang out with the jousters and wenches on the shores of Lake Tahoe? Held at the Camp Richardson Historic Resort, this one offers four stages of entertainment, 900 costumed actors and more chances to buy food, drink and cool stuff than you can shake a turkey leg at. www.valhallafaire.com (June 2-3 and 9-10)

Festival Napa Valley: As a fundraiser for youth music programs, this 10-day festival offers everything from decadent winemaker dinners to free concerts in the park as it hops from high-end restaurants and prestigious wineries to concert halls. The price tag to some of its five-star events can be steep, but they offer a rare opportunity to see and even rub shoulders with international music superstars and other celebrities. www.festivalnapavalley.org (July 20-29)

Pageant of the Masters: You’ve got two months to enjoy Laguna Beach’s Festival of the Arts, one of the best juried fine-arts shows in the country. But make plans now to buy tickets to the “Pageant of the Masters” in which theatrical magic and creative humans re-create a series of “living pictures” every night. In 2018, the tradition will celebrate 85 years with “Under the Sun,” evoking masterpieces by impressionists and plein air artists. www.foapom.com (July 7-Sept. 1)

Russian River Jazz and Blues: Over its 40-plus-year history this summer swan song has hosted legions of musical legends, including Etta James and Buddy Guy. The music is top-notch and the atmosphere is even better, with a stage set right on the beach. Pitch a tent under the redwoods and kayak, paddle boat or swim in the river while the bands play. www.russianriverfestivals.com (Mid-September)

Reading this on your phone? Stay up to date with our free mobile app. Get it from the Apple app store or the Google Play store.

Half Moon Bay Pumpkin Festival: This is the mother of all pumpkin festivals. In a state with this much agriculture, that’s no small feat. Cars line Highway 92 throughout the two-day celebration of all things October, a time of year when this Pacific coast-side town simply sparkles. This time why not avoid the traffic and make a weekend of it? www.pumpkinfest.miramarevents.com (Mid-October)