Idaho Governor C.L. "Butch" Otter made a recent proclamation that grabbed the attention of the L.A. Times, but flew under the radar of most people in Idaho. On the same day that the federal government shut down and Idaho's new health exchange launched, Gov. Otter declared Oct. 1 "Aaron Paul Sturtevant Day".

WHEREAS, “Aaron Paul” first became a household name for his role as “Jesse

Pinkman” on the popular AMC series “Breaking Bad;” and WHEREAS, Aaron won two Emmy Awards for “Outstanding Supporting Actor in a

Drama Series” for his role in “Breaking Bad” in 2010 and 2012; and WHEREAS, anyone who watched Aaron Paul’s performance in “Breaking Bad”

witnessed the devastating, tragic impacts of methamphetamine use on individuals, and the

scourge that meth has become to our communities and society; and WHEREAS, Aaron Paul continues to be an ambassador for the State of Idaho throughout

the nation and is an inspiration to all Idahoans; NOW, THEREFORE, I, C.L. “BUTCH” OTTER, Governor of the State of Idaho, hereby

proclaim October 1, 2013, as Aaron Paul Sturtevant Day.

Aaron Paul Sturtevant, who goes by Aaron Paul, played the meth-cooking Jessie Pinkman in AMC's "Breaking Bad." The hit show's finale was Sept. 30, but the show's much-anticipated end wasn't the final word in Idaho. The governor's proclamation came two weeks after the Emmett-born actor rented out the Egyptian Theatre in downtown Boise for a screening of one of the final episodes.

According to Otter's spokesman Jon Hanian, a proclamation of this kind isn't unusual.

"He's obviously had great success in his chosen profession, winning accolades and honors for his role in 'Breaking Bad.' He speaks fondly of Boise and of the state and of his experience of growing up here," Hanian says.

Hanian says he's not sure if the governor is a fan of the show, but he says Otter wanted to recognize this "Idaho son," despite his living in L.A. for the past several years.

And for those who missed the feverishly hyped visit from Paul at the Egyptian, Bushmill's whiskey produced this video documenting it. The whiskey company sponsored his trip to the City of Trees, as Paul refers to Boise. In the video Paul sips whiskey with some friends and talks about his Idaho roots -- and "staying grounded" in Hollywood.