Christina here….

One “Million” Mom’s sent me an email!

Dear Christina, As the Christmas shopping season begins full swing, here is our annual “Naughty or Nice” retailer list. We have taken the top 100 national retailers and reviewed their websites, media advertising and in-store signage in an effort to help you know which companies are Christmas-friendly. Over the past seven years, OMM has stood firm in the “War on Christmas.” Companies who used to refuse to acknowledge Christmas now have Christmas “shops” inside their stores. Many of them now liberally use “Christmas” in their advertising and in-store signage. Sadly, there are still some companies which refuse to use “Christmas.” They continue to insult and offend Christian shoppers by sticking with their politically correct “holiday” term.

Yaay! I love how OMM can Dixie Dogwhistle what is really a “War Against Inclusion” and pretend that when businesses attempt to be more inclusive during the holidays, that they are somehow unfriendly to Christmas.

I really don’t understand why Christians feel insulted and offended when businesses use the word “holiday” instead of “Christmas” – fuck inclusion, right? YOU MUST ACKNOWLEDGE OUR HOLIDAY EXCLUSIVELY OR WE WILL HURT YOU WITH OUR WALLETS.

Criteria – AFA reviewed up to four areas to determine if a company was “Christmas-friendly” in their advertising: print media (newspaper inserts), broadcast media (radio/television), website and/or personal visits to the store. If a company’s ad has references to items associated with Christmas (trees, wreaths, lights, etc.), it was considered as an attempt to reach “Christmas” shoppers.

So even carrying your religious tchotchkes aren’t enough for the AFA? Not mentioning Christmas does not mean someone is against Christmas. You’re confusing neutrality for persecution, AFA.

If prayer actually did anything, I’d pray that you guys get over your petty persecution complex.

p.s. Here are the companies “against” Christmas:

Companies AGAINST “Christmas”

Banana Republic

Barnes & Noble

Family Dollar

Foot Locker

Gap Stores

L.L. Bean

Limited Brands

Maurice’s

Office Depot

Old Navy

Radio Shack

Staples

Supervalu

Victoria’s Secret

Learn more about Christina and follow her @ziztur.