The province of New Brunswick is toying with the idea of adding a second moose hunt in 2017.

Dwayne Sabine, a biologist with the Department with Natural Resources, says the minister has been looking into the idea.

Sabine says there are benefits to having a split season.

"We see some crowding right now in some wildlife management zones where we have a lot of tags out with healthy moose populations," said Sabine.

"A split season would split the hunters up, a little less crowded in the woods."

The Department of Natural Resources registered a record number of moose this season, 3,728 animals were killed in total.

The Department of Natural Resources is considering a move to split moose hunting season in 2017. (CBC)

That's up from the previous year, which had a record 3,683 moose tagged. The success rate of hunters is around 80 per cent.

Sabine says a split season wouldn't necessarily mean more hunters in the woods.

"Sustainability would still be our first responsibility," said Sabine.

"It would also be helpful for the butcher situations," said Sabine.

"A lot of butchers are booked up solid right now, and I've heard a lot of hunters complaining they have no place to take their moose."

Larry Henderson, a meat cutter just outside of Fredericton, says he's booked solid after every hunting season.

"I've got 35 moose right now," said Henderson. "It's the busiest time of the year."

Henderson, a meat cutter since the 1970s, says he works non-stop for days after moose season begins each year.

"Well you work away at it. I've always had a full cooler, doesn't matter if it's a three-day season, five-day season, or a six-day one," said Henderson.

The Department of Natural Resources 3,728 animals were killed in total. (CBC)

"If I didn't have to hang them as long, that would help, but breaking it up like that would probably help."

Any changes to the season in the future would require a vote in cabinet.

The province is returning to a three-day moose season in 2016, down from the previous two years which saw five-day hunts.