The Last Jedi doesn’t feel like a Star Wars movie. This isn’t a bad thing, exactly. There are moments of brilliance where director Rian Johnson is clearly trying to elevate this franchise, imbue it with a greater complexity. There are other moments that feel like the worst of Marvel films. And then there are the porgs, which are a bit like the Minions of the franchise.

I’m going to go ahead and discuss spoilers from here on out, because I feel this film is difficult to dissect without going into detail, and let’s be honest, nobody needs a recommendation to go and see a Star Wars film. So if you haven’t seen it, read no further.

Major Spoilers ahead

The very first scene, with Hux’s threat to Poe turning into a prank call, was tonally off. Guardians of the Galaxy was heavily influenced by Star Wars, and now it seems that inspiration has turned full circle.

In fact, although some of the humor was welcome, there was far too much wisecracking throughout the film. At the end, I half expected Rey’s ship to crash land on Earth and encounter the Avengers, only to turn to the camera and wink as the credits rolled.

On the other hand, there are some surprisingly mature themes here, as the franchise moves beyond the very clearly defined good and evil of the past installments. The importance of failure, the refusal to define Kylo by his Force allegiance, and the admission that heroes can come from humble backgrounds are all interesting attempts to diversify the narrative.

I confess, I never liked Luke Skywalker as a character before (please don’t hate me), but I really enjoyed his presence in this film. Luke has grown beyond the starry-eyed boy and into a jaded, isolated old master, paralleling Yoda’s journey from the original trilogy.

But the moment where he intended to murder the young, sleeping Kylo felt utterly wrong, going against the grain of everything the character is. It may have been only an instant, but Skywalker always seemed genuinely innocent, the kind of guy who doesn’t learn to masturbate until his late teens. The man is a boy scout, and he has no business murdering sleeping students.

That being said, Mark Hamill has only improved with age, and I was deeply sorry to see him go. I loved his dramatic force-projection scene with Kylo, and him peacefully fading off into the Force after a long, accomplished life seemed the most fitting end to the space Messiah.

But I’m getting ahead of myself. The new face of the franchise is Rey, and she has grown less and less interesting the more we see of her. Daisy Ridley is likable and charismatic, but she doesn’t have much to go on here; she’s wildly overpowered, and an early hint that she may embrace the dark side never really goes anywhere. She seems fascinated by the potential of evil, and then not. I don’t understand her motivation, other than to have an exciting adventure.

The much-anticipated reveal of her parentage can best be described as an enjoyable disappointment. I like the fact that genius can emerge from nothing, as Star Wars has always been fixated on heritage and fatalism. But I also feel like I need some sort of explanation for the seemingly most powerful individual in the franchise. Then again, Kylo Ren may have been lying. But I’m starting to feel like I don’t much care what Rey does from now on.

Kylo Ren has turned into the most fascinating and complex Star Wars character ever, as far as I’m concerned. For a series that’s always been so black and white, Kylo is very grey indeed, and is set up to be the major villain, or perhaps even hero, of the new trilogy.

Adam Driver puts in a strong, understated performance, as Kylo has matured beyond tantrums. Well, almost. He does shatter his Vader-wannabe mask in a fit of rage, physically and metaphorically destroying his old identity and embracing himself for who he truly is. I always liked the idea of Darth Vader being a legend in this fictional universe, so much so that he has a fanboy trying to emulate him.

But Kylo’s utter humiliation at the hands of Rey, and manipulation by Snoke has taught him that there was only one Darth Vader, and his story ended long ago. Kylo’s story, on the other hand, looks to be completely unpredictable.

The Force-connection scenes between him and Rey were among the highlights of the film, and provided some much-needed characterization for both of them, allowing both to speak, debate, even flirt, without any need for a lightsaber battle.

But I must say, I felt cheated when it comes to lightsaber battles. The Last Jedi has way too many lasers and speeding spacecraft. Starfighters are cool, I guess, but they’re just not as fun as two people desperately fighting to the death with laser swords, and the countless scenes of Poe shooting through space, effortlessly avoiding being hit, really made me notice the runtime.

There’s a lot of time spent at a space casino, with little payoff. Poe appears to be the new Han Solo, and a surrogate son for Leia, which is cute. Finn shows an understandable desire to run away, only to be stopped by the cheery, vaguely annoying Rose. The two spark it off, but prove to be a dull couple indeed, and we’re given very little reason to care for them.

Dearly departed Carrie Fisher gives a strong final(?) performance for Princess Leia, and there are several instances where it looks as though she’s about to die onscreen, only for her to survive to the end credits intact. I’m hoping her character will peacefully die offscreen before the next installment, which is surely the most tasteful thing to do, given the circumstances. I was kind of worried Disney was going to use that creepy face-capturing technology to continue her story, but they have stated that they won’t, even if they’d really like to.

The scene where Kylo chooses not kill his mother is powerful – the man is more than willing to stab his father in the gut, but we all know that only a true monster kills their mom; that’s Norman Bates level of villainy. But his comrades go ahead and do the job for him, only for Leia to float through the vacuum of space, proving her command of the Force.

It’s another scene I’m conflicted by – Leia always seemed like she chose a more “normal” life compared to her brother, and this feels like another scene that dilates the power of the Force. The Last Jedi, much like The Force Awakens, gives the impression that mastering the Force is kind of easy. Thankfully, there’s no mention of midichlorians.

One of the greatest scenes in the film is between Rey and Kylo (most of the great scenes involve the two, really) in Snoke’s fabulously red throne room – he’s not an attractive man, but he certainly has a flair for interior design. When Kylo betrays Snoke, he establishes himself as the big bad, which is great, but also renders Snoke utterly pointless. What on earth was the point of him, other than to be a diet Palpatine?

Not everybody needs a padded backstory, but characters that significantly drive the plot need more than this. Where did this guy come from, and what was his ultimate plan, other than “being evil?” It feels as though the new trilogy is finding the story as it goes along, which isn’t exactly a bad thing, but has led us down a few dead ends in the process. I wanted to at least hear Snoke say, “you wanna know how I got these scars?”

Then there are the porgs, which are deeply unsettling. I know Star Wars has a history of inserting Beanie Babies into scenes where they don’t belong, but hell, these creatures aren’t even cute. They’re right on the edge of the uncanny valley, more akin to deformed fetuses rather than adorable little critters. And they’re everywhere, breaking the tension, interrupting the narrative flow like a blaring toy commercial, which is what they are, really.

Seeing past the various flaws, this film is a joy to look at. The salt planet (let’s all thank that guy who licked the ground for clarifying that for us), the beautiful isolation of Luke’s island, the ragtag, chipped-away aesthetic of the Rebellion, were all wonderfully depicted. But there was a certain emptiness here that’s difficult to pin down.

The Last Jedi is tough to define; I really loved some moments in this film, and despised others. Luke had his finest appearance on screen, as far as I’m concerned, and a great send-off. Princess Leia is supremely dignified throughout, even when she’s floating through the depths of space, frosted in ice. Rey’s emptiness was balanced by Kylo’s complexity, and Finn, Poe, Rose and whoever Benicio Del Toro was, were all … there. Oh, and I forgot to mention Captain Phasma. But that’s ok, because she never did anything.

I left the theatre in a strange mood, unsure if I was even looking forward to the next installment. I had very high hopes for Rian Johnson, seeing as Looper is one of my favorite sci-fi films. But The Last Jedi lacked Looper’s slickness. It was bloated, burpy, tonally wobbly. Forty minutes could have been sliced out of this film, and would have left it leaner, healthier.

I still trust Rian Johnson with the new trilogy, I think. But I’m even more wary about Disney’s alarming takeover of the entertainment world. Are all their films going to feel like they’re part of the Marvel cinematic universe now?

We’ll see what’s next for Star Wars. I had a lot of issues with The Force Awakens recycling old story, but it still felt very much like a Star Wars film. The Last Jedi manages to be both a bold step forward, and a significant step back.

Follow me on Facebook or Twitter