ASUS Google Nexus 7 16GB Android Tablet (2013 version) with a 1080p Full HD Display and a Quad-Core Processor

This award-winning tablet races through pre-loaded Google apps with its 1.5GHz quad-core processor, and 5.1 surround sound lends clarity to business calls and video game sound effects.

CNET Editor’s Choice Tablet

CNET called the ASUS Google Nexus 7 “the best tablet value on the market” because of its HD screen, battery life, and speedy performance. The latter is thanks to the quad-core processor, which the review notes helps seamlessly power racing games and create “the best-performing small tablet for gaming.”

Create Kid-Friendly Profiles with Android 4.3

You can restrict kids’ access to websites and other questionable content by creating kid-friendly profiles on the Jelly Bean operating system. You can also download your choice of over one million apps available on Google Play.

Easy-to-Hold Design

The tablet’s thin bezel makes it easier to hold it with one hand, freeing up the other to tap through apps or high-five strangers.

Specifications

ASUS Google Nexus 7 Tablet

Model number: ASUS-2B16

7” 1080p full HD display

2.3 million pixels create 323ppi

1.5GHz quad-core Qualcomm Snapdragon S4 Pro processor

2GB RAM

16GB hard drive

Android 4.3 Jelly Bean operating system

Pre-loaded with Chrome, Gmail, YouTube, and Hangout apps

Buy apps from Google Play

1.2MP front and 5MP rear HD cameras

5.1 virtual surround sound

Narrow bezel

Condition: new

1-year warranty from ASUS

Dimensions: 4.5”x7.9”x0.35”, 0.6lb.

In the Box: Tablet, charger, manual, USB cable

ASUS was named for Pegasus, a symbol of wisdom and knowledge in Greek mythology. In addition to these two tenets, the company mirrors the winged horse in another significant respect: both entities have taken part in a series of epic journeys.

ASUS notebooks have lived on the MIR Space Station. They were the first to work in the thin, icy air atop Mount Everest. As fireworks exploded over the opening ceremonies of the Beijing Olympics in 2008, ASUS servers directed the show. ASUS motherboards have probably even found their way directly into your home or office, as they’re present in one of every three computers and one in every two pizza delivery men. That’s a lot of ground for the Taiwanese company to cover in less than three decades.

Tablet FAQ



Answers to common questions for first-time tablet buyers. Answers to common questions for first-time tablet buyers.

Tablet Buying Guide



A simplified look at the complex world of tablets. Find out which features are right for you. A simplified look at the complex world of tablets. Find out which features are right for you.

For questions pertaining to this deal, click the Ask a Question button below. For post-purchase inquiries, please contact Groupon customer support.



Goods sold by Groupon Goods. View the Groupon Goods FAQ to learn more.