Advertisement

Advertisement

Over the last two months, GOP Texas Sen. Ted Cruz has been forced to deal with various allegations against him and his campaign. With less than three months until the Republican National Convention, a new conspiracy has been released, this time against his father.

Conspiracy Cruz

Last month, the National Enquirer broke a story claiming that Cruz allegedly had affairs with at least five separate women, including former campaign staffers. Cruz quickly denied the allegations, which quickly faded away over the next week. Now a new claim has been released, this time targeting Cruz's father, Rafael Cruz, allegedly linking him to the assassination of former President John F. Kennedy, as reported by The American Intelligence Report on April 17.

Advertisement

WAS CRUZ’S FATHER LINKED TO THE JFK ASSASSINATION? https://t.co/acN2jQQm14 pic.twitter.com/FFwwZLuTzy — Kristan T. Harris (@KristanTHarris) April 17, 2016

The site notes that Rafael Cruz Sr. was in New Orleans and Dallas shortly before Kennedy was assassination on November 22, 1963. The elder Cruz married his first wife, Julia Ann Gara, following his graduation from the University of Texas in 1959. The couple moved from Dallas to New Orleans three years later in 1962. The claims of a conspiracy are based on a photo of alleged Kennedy assassin Lee Harvey Oswald standing with a man that the site claims is Cruz.

The American Intelligence Report, via the Wayne Madsen Report, claims that Oswald hired Cubans to help distribute "Hands off Cuba" propaganda in New Orleans during the summer of 1963. In a photo released by the site, Oswald can be seen standing next to a man who looks similar to Cruz.

Advertisement

Top Videos of the Day

Going even further, the report states that a "source" confirmed that it was Rafael Cruz in the photograph, and that "there is a strong reason to believe that Cruz was associated with Central Intelligence Agency’s anti-Castro operations."

Conspiracy debunked

There have been hundreds of conspiracy theories about the murder of President Kennedy, with some having legitimate claims to contradict the findings of the Warren Commission. However, while some theories deserve investigation, others have been proven false, or to be downright silly.

Snopes: Was Ted Cruz's Father Linked to the JFK Assassination?: Disreputable web site posits a link between Te... https://t.co/qEIuNjPEl2 — Skeptic Network (@SkepNet) April 17, 2016

Just hours after the report of Cruz being linked to Oswald and the JFK assassination, Snopes released their findings.

Advertisement

Describing the Wayne Madsen Report as "disreputable" and a "notoriously unreliable conspiratorial," Snopes found nothing that could backup the claims made in their report. Snopes also pointed out that Cruz left the city of Dallas a year before Kennedy even made his trip to Dealey Plaza, sarcastically noting, "the conspiracy in which Cruz and Oswald were involved was so vast, they were able to predict the movements of President Kennedy several months before Kennedy himself planned them."

Conclusion

The idea that Sen. Cruz's father had anything to do with the plot to kill Kennedy is, at least as of press time, a conspiracy that belongs with the Umbrella man. In 1978, United States House Select Committee on Assassinations released their findings in the Kennedy assassination and concluded that "Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy," though it's highly unlikely that Cruz had anything to do with it.