Defending World Champions, European Champions in 2008 and 2012, success at the age-group level, Real Madrid and Barcelona continually top or near the top of the wealthiest clubs list and home grown players much sought after around the world – this is a Golden Age for Spanish soccer ........or is it?

Last week there was a very public reminder that success has not brought benefit to all. Because for all the success achieved over the last 10 years or so Spain has an unsustainable system by which the top two teams – Real Madrid and Barcelona - siphon off so much money that the others are faced with accepting the inevitably of irrelevance or incurring so much debt that bankruptcy becomes just another milestone in the business plan.

Along the way suppliers go unpaid, taxes owing to governments mount and players and support staff are surprised if a pay check arrives on time.

Racing Santander is not a well known name having never won a top honor in their one hundred year history. Fans in North America are more likely to recognize the name on account of US international defender Carlos Bocanegra playing on loan at Santander last season before signing for Chivas USA.

Others with a slightly longer memory may remember when Ukrainian-American businessman Dmitry Piterman bought the club in 2003.

There is nothing particularly unusual with a foreign businessman buying a Spanish soccer team but Piterman was not content to just own the club he wanted to run and manage every aspect of the club.

A short while after buying a 24% stake and controlling interest in the club a TV interviewer asked Piterman is he was not cutting a bit more off than he could chew with his all-encompassing management style/ego-trip.

His response was to say the least sharp and to the point; “There’s a dork running the most powerful country in the world without a qualification to his name. And you ask me for a diploma to run a football team? Give me a break.”

However, Piterman could not get the Spanish Football Federation to budge on the technical qualifications to actually coach the club but they were no match for Dmitry. Piterman employed someone with the appropriate qualifications and installed his stooge as a figure-head coach.

Meanwhile, Piterman accredited himself as the club photographer albeit one who sat next to the bench and barked instructions to his players. The first and possibly only owner/coach/photographer in the game.

Piterman later bought Deportivo Alves but by 2007 he was gone from Spanish soccer. Nonetheless, he is still regarded as being one of the weirdest characters ever to own a Spanish team and that is no mean achievement in a business that spawns them.

But back to this current edition of Racing Santander. Last Thursday, Santander, currently in the third tier of Spanish soccer after suffering two successive demotions took to the field for a Copa del Rey quarter-final second leg match against top flight Real Sociedad.

But that was about as far as it got.

A few days before the scheduled game the Santander players had issued a statement stating that unless the club president and the board of directors resigned en masse, they the players would refuse to play.

The players’ beef was that despite many promises to the contrary the club had not paid them for months.

By kick off time the resignation of the board had not been forthcoming. So when the referee blew for the game to start, Santander, rather than competing for the ball simply stood around the centre circle, arms locked in unison, offering their version of Roberto Duran's famous "No Más."

After a rather one sided 30 or so seconds in which Sociedad knocked the ball around (100% pass completion rates no doubt), referee Jesus Gil Manzan was left with no option but to abandon the match.

The stand taken by the Santander players drew unqualified support …well almost. The Spanish Football Federation (SFF) took a dim view of the players’ actions and banned Santander from next season’s Cup competition and fined the club $4,000.

Most right minded people would point out that rather than making an issue of the Santander protest the SFF is far more culpable for allowing it to get to that stage.

But the situation has become so prevalent that it is doubtful that the SFF would no where to start. Non-payment of wages has been a festering sore for Spanish soccer for many years. Just over two years ago it led to a players strike and at that time it was estimated that players in the top two levels of the Spanish game were essentially subsidizing their respective clubs to the tune of anywhere between $40M to $80M.

Industrial action lasted just one week at the start of the 2011/12 season after both sides agreed on a deal to protect players’ salaries in the event of clubs declaring insolvency.

Nonetheless, unpaid wages and a litany of clubs seeking bankruptcy protection continue to haunt Spanish soccer at all levels. In fact, Spain leads all other leagues with the unenviable record of the most bankrupt teams.

Unpaid taxes have hovered around the $1B for a number of years with the top 20 indebted clubs at the end of the 2011/12 season owing a cumulative total of $4B to creditors.

Underpinning the financially dysfunctional model is a TV rights deal that currently sees Real Madrid and Barcelona pocket around 42% of the revenue while the remainder is split between the other 18 clubs.

Actually, it is not so much a TV deal as a series of deals. But with one eye to the Barclays Premier League (and now Serie A) where TV rights are sold as a package and the money is distributed more equitably although not equally, Spanish clubs have accepted, in principle at least, the selling of rights collectively and that the distribution of income must change.

But accepting a concept in principle is one thing, actually tailoring a binding agreement is something else. Barcelona and Real Madrid have made it clear that they will not accept a deal that gives them less money than they currently receive.

So although there has been talk of the big two receiving a smaller percentage the percentage may drop but Barca and Real except/need the TV pie to grow significantly in order to generate the same or greater cash flow.

The other issue is that the Spanish top league seems intent on re-enacting Nero’s show stopping one night performance in Rome from a few thousand years ago. The intention was to have the new system in place for the 2015/16 season but now the talk is of 2016/17.

Already, La Liga only generates around 50% of the Premier League’s broadcast income and around 75% of what Serie A generates. In the intervening years these gaps are only likely to grow ever larger with every team outside of the big two bearing an excessive burden.

There is, however, one group who changed the way they do business. From 2014/15 onwards 35% of all domestic television revenues will be deducted at source and remitted to the Spanish taxman.

Post-script

One bit of redeeming news is that over the weekend the Racing Santander board was replaced. Conversely, carrying debts of over $65M the future looks bleak for all concerned.