The number of patients waiting to be admitted for operations or other treatment in June was a quarter of a million higher than in the same month last year, official figures show.

Labour claimed that overflowing accident and emergency departments and cuts to nursing jobs were to blame for the figures, which were published by NHS England on Thursday.

But the Department for Health insisted that average waiting times are remaining stable and said demand for services had increased significantly since 2010.

The figures come after a report by Monitor, the NHS regulator, which warned that some trusts were cancelling non-emergency procedures to deal with a higher load of emergency cases, resulting in longer waiting times.

The "referral to treatment" data reveals that waiting lists, which have hovered around 2.5 million patients in recent years, reached 2.88 million in June, the highest level since May 2008.

However, the figures also show that the median waiting time for treatment is currently 5.7 weeks – the same duration as in June 2012.

A&E departments have been under growing strain with ministers blaming a rapid rise in demand for emergency care, but opponents have claimed the introduction of the 111 non-emergency phone line and restructuring of the NHS have made the problem worse.

Andrew Gwynne MP, shadow health minister, said: “This year, thousands of extra patients are facing the agony of a long-awaited operation being cancelled as overflowing A&E departments need more and more hospital beds.

“David Cameron wasted £3 billion on an NHS reorganisation that took the focus off patient care. At the same time, almost five thousand nursing jobs were axed and cuts to older people's care budgets left thousands more vulnerable people arriving at A&E."

A Department of Health spokeswoman said: "The NHS is performing well – it is treating over a million patients a month.

"But despite this average waiting times are low and stable and the number of patients waiting longer than 18 weeks is nearly 55,000 lower than in May 2010, and the number of people waiting for more than a year to start treatment is the lowest it has ever been."