A group of outraged Florida voters has launched the Web site MyCongressmanIsNuts.com in a drive to oust Democratic Rep. Alan Grayson, the outspoken lawmaker who grabbed national headlines after it was revealed that, among other comments, he called an adviser to the Federal Reserve chairman a “K Street whore” in a radio interview in September.

The site is raising money to defeat the Orlando-area congressman and the site’s organizers describe it as a “more appropriate alternative” to Mr. Grayson’s CongressmanWithGuts.com, which the Grayson campaign said helped to raise more than $250,000 in the first three weeks of October.

The “Nuts” site took in about $3,335 overnight after its Thursday evening launch, according to a donation ticker on the Web page.

“Alan Grayson’s recent self-indulgent behavior has paralyzed his ability to serve as an advocate for the citizens of central Florida,” the Web site says in a plea for contributions.

The site features YouTube videos of TV and cable news reports critical of Mr. Grayson’s exploits.

“Every penny that we raise is going to go to exposing his policies and who he really is,” said Angie Langley, 34, chairwoman of the recently formed political action committee behind the Web site. “We are going to flood the district with bumper stickers, yard signs, and we are prepared to launch radio and television ads - whatever it takes to make sure this guy is not re-elected.”

Ms. Langley, a business development consultant in the Lake County portion of Mr. Grayson’s district, said the PAC is not affiliated with a political party and is not backing any candidates. She is not new to politics, however, having previously served as chairman of the Lake County Republican Party.

The PAC’s two other board members are a registered Republican and a registered libertarian.

Mr. Grayson’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Several Republicans have lined up to challenge Mr. Grayson, including a trio of “tea party” activists hoping to capitalize on the anti-tax, anti-big government movement that flourished over the summer. But national Republicans reportedly are looking for a stronger candidate in what has historically been a GOP-leaning district.

The Bronx, N.Y.-born Mr. Grayson, a wealthy businessman and lawyer, was a freshman House member virtually unknown on the national stage before his stinging rhetoric and take-no-prisoners style began to draw attention in September. That’s when he stood on the House floor and said the Republican health care plan is “to die quickly if you get sick.”

He responded to calls for an apology by apologizing instead to “the dead and their families that we haven’t voted sooner to end this holocaust in America.” He also set up his own Web site - NamesOfTheDead.com - that claims to list people who have died without health insurance.

He has described criticism of his frank comments as “Republican hissy fits.” Some House Republicans talked of an official censure for Mr. Grayson over his health care remarks on the floor, but the effort died.

But on Tuesday Mr. Grayson did offer what he called “my sincere apology” to Linda Robertson, the adviser to Fed Chairman Ben S. Bernanke whom he called a “K Street whore” last month on the nationally syndicated “Alex Jones Show.”

Such derogatory references to K Street, a base of many Washington lobbyists, are not unheard of in the nation’s capital, but are usually reserved for private conversations and not nationally syndicated radio.

On the “Alex Jones Show,” Mr. Grayson said: “This lobbyist, this K Street whore, is trying to teach me about economics.”

The remark was widely criticized by Republicans and Democrats alike.

“This characterization of Ms. Robertson, made during a radio interview last month in the context of the debate over whether the Federal Reserve should be independently audited, was inappropriate, and I apologize,” he said.

Copyright © 2019 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.