When the photo of Higuain’s secret medical first leaked, Napoli fans across the world were distraught. The loss of our star striker would have hurt enough but to lose him to our most hated rival; that was heartbreaking. Just months earlier he had been kissing our shirt and singing with fans under the stands shouting about defending the city. Now he plays for the team whose fans invoke Vesuvius to bury that city in lava. As if that were not enough, just as hurtful to fans was his motivation. Higuain didn’t leave for money. Napoli president Aurelio De Laurentiis came forward and said he had offered more to the Argentine striker than he is currently receiving at Juventus. Higuain left “to win”. He obviously didn’t believe he could do that in a blue shirt; and if he didn’t believe it, then why should we as fans? Without his help and that of his 36 goals, what reason would there be to even dream of competing for trophies?

While the supporters remained in shock, the club went to work; scooping up some of the most talented young players in Italy and Europe (Milik, Zielinski, Diawara, Rog, Maksimovic). Yet with youth comes inexperience, and it was only natural to think it would take time for the new acqusitions to settle in and contribute on the field. However, the two youngsters that have been given a chance, Zielinski and Milik, have made an immediate impact. Zielinski is already pushing Allan for a starting spot and Milik has made his claim as the starting striker with a goal per minute ratio that is top in Europe. Their contributions so far have been invaluable and they have given us reason to have high, but tempered, expectations for the other additions.

Yet what has really stood out is how the team as a whole has performed on the pitch. Sometimes having a star player can damage a team as they look to force feed him the ball in times of need. Perhaps this was the case with Higuain in Napol; for as impressive as Napoli were last season, this year they look even better. The team’s movement seems even more coordinated. At their best, the players have looked like a single attacking entity. They did at times last year as well but these days it seems more like the normal run of affairs. Without a doubt the extra time for the returning players to learn Sarri’s system has helped, yet one cannot help but wonder if they are also playing a bit more free mentally without having to worry about feeding a striker who would at times throw a fit if he wasn’t serviced well.

It’s important to remain grounded and remember that Juventus are still clear favorites to win the title. They had a terrible start to last season only to put on an amazing run of 25 matches in which they collected 73 out of a possible 75 points. At the same time, it is also important to appreciate this moment at the top of the table; to be grateful to the coach and players that have left us wondering if perhaps out of our midsummer despair we’ve emerged stronger than ever.