THOUSAND OAKS, Calif. -- Robert Quinn crept toward the line of scrimmage with just over nine minutes remaining in Sunday's second quarter. He burst around Indianapolis Colts left tackle Anthony Castonzo at the snap, then picked himself up off the ground and wrapped his arms around the upper body of quarterback Scott Tolzien for his first sack of the year.

Two plays later, with the Los Angeles Rams in a nickel package on third and long, Quinn operated out of a three-point stance and did the very same thing -- he got around Castonzo, went after Tolzien, then quickly shifted his focus to Robert Turbin after a quick pitch, sending the Colts' running back to the ground almost immediately after he caught the football.

In a span of three plays, Quinn was personally responsible for a loss of 11 yards.

"That was just the official knock the rust off," Quinn said, smiling. "It's just fun to make a couple plays."

In defensive coordinator Wade Phillips' 3-4 base set, Robert Quinn has transitioned from defensive end to outside linebacker, where he will sometimes drop into coverage but mostly rush the passer. Sean M. Haffey/Getty Images

If he can remain healthy, Quinn should make a whole lot more plays in Wade Phillips' system.

Phillips' 3-4 base set required Quinn to transition from defensive end to outside linebacker, where he will take on a role similar to the one DeMarcus Ware played in Dallas and in Denver, occasionally dropping back in coverage but predominantly going after the quarterback. Ware announced his retirement with an Instagram post that highlighted his accomplishments on his jersey. That post is now laminated and taped to Quinn's locker for motivation, as are the career statistics for some of the other great defensive ends and outside linebackers throughout NFL history.

The Rams have been very careful with Quinn, who amassed 40 sacks from 2012-14 but made only 15 starts from 2015-16. He didn't play in any preseason games and was held out of several practices while under what first-year head coach Sean McVay continually referred to as a "maintenance program." But Quinn made most of his adjustment to outside linebacker during the offseason program and said in the days leading up to the regular-season opener that he is "pretty comfortable with where I'm at."

The Rams played Quinn in only 50 percent of the defensive snaps in their 46-9 rout of the Colts, but he made his presence felt nonetheless.

"He's certainly a rusher that you have to account for," said McVay, who will probably give Quinn more snaps as the weeks go by. "He's got a great get-off; love the effort and intensity he plays with. He's one of the guys that I've always had a lot of respect for, just coaching against him in years past. When No. 94 is right, you feel him. He is an elite rusher and he certainly looked like that guy [on Sunday]."