Singer Halsey has always been open. She's open about her sexuality, her past struggles, and her emotions. She has said in the past, "I'm not always going to be calm...I'm entitled to my emotions."

Today, Halsey has spoken up regarding a recent Buzzfeed article penned about her. The article, titled "What Does A Queer Pop Star Look Like In 2016," is a lengthy essay that analyzes Halsey's sexuality in conjunction with her celeb status. Halsey, who is openly bisexual, has taken issue with the article, claiming that it plays into bi-erasure, or the minimizing of bisexuality in the queer narrative.

In a lengthy Twitter rant, Halsey has called out Buzzfeed for the article, saying, "Sorry I'm not gay enough for you." She went on to write, "tiresome analysis of my 1 year in the public eye and the ignorance of 8+ years of sexual discovery to determine if I'm truly queer. [And it] is part of a mentality so engrained in the erasure of bisexual 'credibility' even within the lgbt community."

The Buzzfeed article in question starts off by describing how Halsey has kissed women at her concerts and then segues into a commentary of her songs and music videos, particularly focusing on the lack of same-sex romance in each. The article discusses Halsey's recent VMA performance with Andrew Taggart of The Chainsmokers, saying, "Her VMAs outfit, however, was one of her most traditionally feminine picks: sparkly white bell bottoms and a tiny matching crop top showing a peek of underboob, the look topped off with a plain long brown wig. She and Taggart might have looked like an unremarkable straight couple to anyone who didn’t know better."

The essay goes on to dissect Halsey's social life, song lyrics, and Instagram presence, saying that they all raise "complicated questions about her constructed identity." The author poses the question, is Halsey a "one-of-the-boys kind of girl" or a "Lez Bro?" The article concludes in an open-ended manner, leaving the reader to ponder the future of Halsey's image. "Perhaps Halsey will avoid incorporating too much queerness into her image in the future.... Or perhaps she’ll prove that being an androgynous, bisexual pop star is a real possibility in the mainstream."

While the article might have had the intention of making us think about the spectrum of queerness, it's clear that Halsey has been deeply offended by the tone. Many of the comments also call the essay out for an overwhelming "she's not gay enough" message. Halsey ended her tweet storm by saying, "You've been an ally and this article just makes me sad. Even in its laughable self awareness of its own stereotyping."

Bi-erasure is a real thing that many bisexual women face and struggle with, every day. The notion that someone's sexuality is a phase, or not real, can be endlessly depressing and damaging to one's identity. Studies have shown that bisexual women are at a higher risk for depression and anxiety, and Halsey herself has opened up about dealing with depression in the past. Halsey's presence in pop culture is important for bisexual girls growing up today. Representation matters, and Halsey has proven that sexual identity doesn't have to take one particular form. Everyone's sexuality is different, and no one should ever tell you that you aren't "enough" of anything to fit into a pre-determined label.

Related: Halsey Opens Up About Having a Miscarriage

Check This Out: