Ivanka Trump just can't get it right.

The US First Daughter has come under fire once again, after this time posting two tweets to "celebrate and honour the LGBTQ community" to mark the start of Pride Month.

Ivanka — who serves as an unpaid advisor to her father US President Donald Trump — posted the tweets to her 3.85 million followers early today, after taking a short break from social media to celebrate the Jewish festival Shauvot.

She tweeted: "Logging back on after Shavuot, wishing everyone a joyful #Pride2017. This month we celebrate and honor the #LGBTQ community."

But these words of support were not well received by the Twitter-sphere as users hit back that neither Ivanka nor her father were friends of the community.

Many users pointed to the actions of the president, who has stripped policies protecting transgender students' bathroom rights after getting into office, as well as to vice president Mike Pence, who openly opposed married equality and appears to support "conversion therapy".

"You don’t get to honor the LGBTQ community when the VP supports gay conversion therapy and your dad supports bathroom bills," wrote one user.

"You openly supported and campaigned for the most anti-LGBTQ+ presidential ticket in recent times. Your words mean nothing to us," wrote another.

Shortly after, Ivanka tweeted again: "I am proud to support my LGBTQ friends and the LGBTQ Americans who have made immense contributions to our society and economy."

But these words were met by similar disapproval from Twitter users, including well-known Hollywood actress Christina Applegate.

"Your dad is reversing the rights for this beautiful group of humans. You ok with that?" Applegate wrote.

"@IvankaTrump you aren't our friend," wrote another.

"Tread carefully dear. Your father is not a fan of the #LGBT, and your pandering doesn't make us appreciate your sentiment."

LGBT news site The Advocate's editor-in-chief Lucas Grindley wrote an op-ed responding to the tweets, claiming Ivanka's words "don't make her an LGBT ally".

"Something about those Pride tweets struck a nerve with LGBT people. We’re sick of being used by Ivanka Trump as a prop," he wrote.

"There are straight people who like to give themselves a very low bar for allyship and then pat themselves on the back for watching Modern Family without visibly wincing. The Trumps are exactly these kind of people," he added.

Ivanka has not responded to the online backlash.

Her father has yet to make any comment on Pride Month or any proclamation declaring June to be a month honoring LGBTQ people.