There's never an end to the little micro-controversies surrounding the impending launch of the Xbox One (via Microsoft) and the PlayStation 4 (via Sony.) It's actually kind of fun for me to see the level and intensity of consumer interaction with these yet-to-be-released products.

The latest story concerns a batch of Xbox One consoles shipped early by Target to a number of lucky consumers, some of whom have taken to sites like YouTube to post about the system.

One customer, going by the moniker Moonlight Swami, posted a number of pictures and videos of the Xbox One User Interface in action. Microsoft responded with what turned out to be a temporary ban on the system/user, though not permanently.

There have been videos taken down from YouTube, and so forth. The typical response. The response you'd expect. (See Daniel Nye Griffiths' post for more on all that.)

Well Sony users took to Twitter to ask Shuhei Yoshida, President of Worldwide Studios at Sony Computer Entertainment, if they'd be banned for doing something similar.

Yoshida's response was a simple "No."

The interesting thing about this, to me at least, is how Sony continues to capture little bits of momentum by simply not doing whatever Microsoft does. Who knows what Sony's used games policy would have been without Microsoft around to come up with something consumers hated?

The competition and the consumer backlash combined resulted in what is at least perceived to be an overall better situation for consumers, with Microsoft adopting a traditional approach to used games rather than their initial idea.

This is a big reason I hope Microsoft continues to make its video game console (rather than spin it off, as some people in the industry have suggested.)

There are plenty of analysts who argue that the Xbox is a money-sink, but without a viable Xbox console we have nothing to pair off against Sony. That would be bad for video games and for the industry---the same would apply in reverse as well, if a hypothetical future Sony ditched its PlayStation business.

The early Xbox One systems shipped can't tell us that much about the system without corresponding games. The UI itself has gotten a new demo that shows what certainly appears to be a much more functional Kinect than the original version:

It looks impressive. A very next-gen UI. The Skype integration is pretty cool, and the load times seem snappy enough. Microsoft should be confident enough in their product to not ban users who received early consoles.

If anything, these users will provide excellent viral marketing for them at no extra cost.

Banning just leaves a bad taste in peoples' mouths---though perhaps the percentage of people who actually hear about this story is insignificant to the bottom line.

You can see a lot of what Moonlight Swami has posted about the Xbox One over at Kotaku.

Whether we see a batch of early PS4 units ship out in the near future remains to be seen. But if you do get one, post away---at least for the time being, Sony appears confident about their next-gen console.

Follow me on Twitter or Facebook. Read my Forbes blog here.