It's a picturesque county known for barbecue and rolling hills, but back in June, one driver came face-to-face with an angry judge along a stretch of highway in Caldwell County.

Dash camera video obtained by KEYE TV shows the end of what a woman described as 7.5 miles of fear on the road.

"There's a guy that's been following me," she says on the video.

The man following her was Caldwell County Precinct 3 Justice of the Peace Ben Brady.

Brady called police to pull the driver over after what he says was reckless driving. He tells KEYE TV she blew past him and two other cars on the stretch of highway. He was worried about people's safety in the county.

But what happened next, according to emails the woman wrote to the San Marcos Police Department, had the woman worrying about her own safety.

In the video, the police officer, who pulled the woman over, brings the two of them together just outside of the camera's view. After a brief back-and-forth, and a disagreement, Brady says: "Just hold on one second, okay, because if you don't, I'm going to find out where you are, I'm going to have you sworn in contempt, and I'll put you in jail for 72 hours - and I can do that."

On the video the woman tells the officer, "Give him whatever information, I'm not going to discuss it."

Then the judge responds, "If I see you again, I'm going to make sure that the county sheriff takes you to jail."

In the emails the woman wrote to the San Marcos Police Department and Caldwell County Officials she states, "This is a blatant misuse of authority."

Justices of the Peace have power in the courtroom.

But KEYE TV wanted to know if Judge Brady has the authority to threaten arrest.

KEYE TV asked the judge, was he elected to be a Justice of the Peace or a traffic officer?

"I'm not a traffic officer, but if I see an infraction that's endangering the people in Caldwell County, I'm going to follow up on that," he said.

In this case, the judge says he wanted to make sure the driver knew she broke the law. He says this was not the first time he had seen the vehicle driving what he says was recklessly in the county.

KEYE TV asked how the judge could put someone in jail for 72 hours for a traffic violation.

"Not for a traffic violation, for contempt, for being contemptuous to the judge," he said.

According to San Marcos Police, the Code of Criminal Procedure gives Texas Justices of the Peace authority over certain criminal cases including traffic violations which happen in their area.

Judges can also order a police officer to make an arrest when the violation happens in front of them.

Attorney Charlie Baird is former Travis County judge.

"Certainly has no authority to hold an individual in contempt unrelated to any court proceeding for speeding," said former Travis County Judge Charlie Baird.

Baird says judges do have the power of contempt in their court, but on the road there's very little they can do.

"Clearly this was not pursuant to a court proceeding and therefore it appears to me, really without any exception, that the judge has overstepped his bounds," said Baird.

Brady says he only followed the vehicle to get the driver's information in case he wanted to file a complaint. Something he hasn't done.

"Could I have worded it better? Yes. At the time I was tired, I was angry, I'm a human being. Did I make a mistake? Probably so, if I did, I won't do it again," Brady said.

The judge says he wants to do his job and do it well. This was about safety, he said.

Brady keeps law books on his desk and tells KEYE TV when you're a new Justice of the Peace you take 80 hours of education in the first year. He says he has exceeded that minimum and now has 120 hours of training.

If a complaint is forwarded to the State Commission on Judicial Conduct it could cost this first-year judge.

The commission says they can't comment on whether or not a complaint has been filed.

Follow us on Twitter @keyetv and LIKE us on Facebook for updates!



