Israel Warns World War III May be Biblical War of Gog and Magog Ezra HaLevi | October 21, 2007

Arutz Sheva US President George W. Bush said a nuclear Iran would mean World War III. Israeli newscasts featured Gog & Magog maps of the likely alignment of nations in that potential conflict. Channel 2 and Channel 10 TV showed the world map, sketching the basic alignment of the two opposing axes in a coming world war, in a manner evoking associations of the Gog and Magog prophecy for many viewers. The prophecy of Gog and Magog refers to a great world war centered on the Holy Land and Jerusalem and first appears in the book of Yechezkel (Ezekiel). On one side were Israel, the United States, Britain, France and Germany. On the other were Iran, Russia, China, Syria and North Korea. US President Bush said Wednesday during a press conference that Iran attaining nuclear weapons raises the risk of "World War III." "If Iran had a nuclear weapon, it'd be a dangerous threat to world peace," Bush said. "So I told people that if you're interested in avoiding World War III, it seems like you ought to be interested [in preventing a nuclear Iran] I take the threat of Iran with a nuclear weapon very seriously." Russian President Vladimir Putin visited Iran Tuesday and slammed the US's refusal to rule out the use of force against Iran's nuclear project. "Not only should we reject the use of force, but also the mention of force as a possibility," he said. Russia has blocked tougher UN sanctions in the UN Security Council, where it has veto power. The Russian president asserts that there is no evidence Iran is pursuing nuclear weapons rather than a peaceful nuclear power program. Israel's Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni called for a new Security Council resolution against Iran at a press conference following her meeting with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice Wednesday. "I do believe there is a need for another Security Council resolution," she told reporters. "In the past, the need to get everybody on board - including Russia and China - led to some compromises on the nature of the sanctions. I hope this will not be the case this time." Prime Minister Ehud Olmert announced Wednesday a sudden trip to Moscow Thursday morning, where he will meet with Putin about Iran. Other topics of discussion will reportedly be Russia's continued supply of weapons to Syria, which have then made their way into the hands of various terrorist groups based there as well. The Internet leader in activist media - Prison Planet.tv . Get access to hundreds of special video reports, audio interviews, books and documentary films. Subscribers will be the first to view Alex Jones' new documentary blockbuster End Game in high quality streaming and download. Click here to subscribe. E-MAIL THIS LINK

Enter recipient's e-mail:



Infowars.com is Copyright 2007 Alex Jones | Fair Use Notice