CLEVELAND, Ohio – LeBron James said his 10-year-old son has "a chance" to perhaps play the in the NBA one day, speaking about LeBron Jr. one day after an online video of him dominating a youth tournament in Houston last weekend went viral.

"He's got a chance," James said Tuesday at The Q following the Cavaliers' morning shootaround in preparation for a game against Minnesota. "If he loves the game, and he works at it, he has a chance to be good. But he's still young, just play for the love of the game, don't worry about nothing else."

On Monday, James tweeted a YouTube video featuring his son playing for the Gulf Coast Blue Chips at a tournament in Houston. James said Tuesday that the team is a Houston-based travel team, but "we'll get the Akron team soon."

Proud of you son! Great job in Houston and congrats on bringing home 1st place. http://t.co/RuxSx4QMBY #JamesGang #StriveForGreatness #RWTW — LeBron James (@KingJames) December 22, 2014

Junior looked like his old man in the video, running the fastbreak, finishing on drives, knocking down floor shots, and drawing multiple defenders to him before throwing passes over his head to wide-open teammates.

As of Saturday, the video had been viewed more than 4.9 million million times. The video was produced by TakeMyTalent.com – it's not immediately clear how the website is connected to James.

On Tuesday, James said his son wasn't aware of the stir the video caused, and that's a good thing.

"He's got an iPad but I try to keep him away from it as much as possible," James said. "As far as what he's doing I don't want him to get involved in that stuff right now. Too young.

"His father knows exactly what could happen."

UPDATED DEC. 27 -- On Christmas Day, NBA fans were treated to another classic duel between James and his friend and former teammate Dwyane Wade. James scored 30 points in Cleveland's loss to Miami -- in James' first game there since he left the Heat to return to the Cavs -- and Wade scored 31 points. It was the seventh time the two had scored at least 30 points in games against each other.

Perhaps their sons will have a similar rivalry.

James also said Zaire Wade, sixth-grade son of James' close friend, the Miami Heat's Dwyane Wade, "is pretty good too." Zaire Wade is one of the top-ranked youth players (yes, there is such a ranking) in the country.

"D-Wade's son could go as well," James said.

Wade said last week that "we're lucky we have kids that love the game we love it.

"At their age, right now, they're talented," Wade said. "You don't know what that's going to lead to, but it's fun for us to be able to share that with our kids. Right now I'm excited for him that his oldest son is taking after him in the sense of the way he plays the game, and my older son as well. It's fun times from the standpoint of being a dad, and the kids loving what you love."

James has a younger son, Bryce, 7, and newborn daughter, Zhuri.

This story was updated with additional information.