About the Tool Lending Library

The Oakland Tool Lending Library currently offers over 5,000 tools available for loan, as well as books and how-to videos and DVDs. The tools can be used for a variety of purposes, including home improvement, remodeling and repairs, gardening and landscaping and seismic retrofit. This is a free service to Oakland, Emeryville, and Piedmont residents and property owners.

Using the Tool Lending Library

Before visiting the Tool Lending Library for the first time, please review the following guidelines and registration instructions:

Workshops

The Tool Lending Library (TLL) offers workshops based on the interests and needs of our patrons. Past classes have included plumbing repairs, power tool safety, working with the router, basic tiling, and basic electrical repairs.

For upcoming workshops, check the Library's calendar of events or sign up for the workshop email list. If you'd like to suggest a new class, feel free to call us at (510) 597-5089 with your suggestion.

Volunteer at the Tool Lending Library

Since our inception, volunteers have been an important part of our program. The TLL always has a variety of work to do. Jobs that need doing are engraving and marking, cleaning and sharpening tools, organizational tasks, label making, and even data input and vacuuming.

If you are interested in volunteering at the Tool Lending Library, please come in for an application or call (510) 597-5089 for more information.

Donations

The Oakland Tool Lending Library accepts donations of new and used tools in good working order.

We have the following restrictions on what we accept:

Tools must be in good working order and include all parts.

We do not accept any hardware or consumables (nails, screws, etc.).

We do not accept tools that need excessive cleaning or preparation.

The tool must be portable and small enough to fit in our storage space.

When and how to donate:

Smaller donations may be dropped off during library open hours at least 30 minutes before closing. Please understand that we need to help patrons waiting in line before we can look at your donation. For larger donations (more than a few items/boxes) or for special arrangements for assessment/pickup, please contact our Donation Coordinator, Ty Yurgelevic at 510-501-7938 or tyurgy@att.net.

History of the Tool Lending Library

The Oakland Tool Lending Library is located in the basement of the Temescal Branch Library.

After the Oakland Hills Firestorm of 1991, the Temescal Branch established a small Home Resources Collection to help residents with their rebuilding and repair projects following this disaster. A tool-lending library was considered as an extension of these efforts, and was finally launched on January 8, 2000 thanks to seed money from a Community Development Block Grant.

The Tool Lending Library has grown over the years with City funding, and is now one of the Library's most popular and unique services.

Friends of the Tool Lending Library

Please visit the Friends of the Tool Lending Library at their website or sign up for their mailing list.