Paykey

This startup was one of the two winners of BBVA Open Talent Europe 2016. PayKey allows making instant payments within any social network, including Facebook Messenger, WhatsApp, Twitter, etc. In this regard, Guy Ziv, vice president of the firm, says that this technology enables a new range of transactions in emerging channels and closes the gap between banking users and their social interactions (social media).

Earnix

Earnix Insurance is an insurance platform that allows to develop accurate and robust customer risk models, Understand the impact of pricing decisions, accelerate time-to-market of new offers and prices and Increase growth and profitability. José Monteagudo, regional manager of the company, highlights the visualization options that help out in analyzing these models to choose the best pricing strategy.

Bondit

The BondIT solution is B2B oriented – it was designed to empower financial advisers with algorithmic data-driven recommendations. BondIT’s purpose is to offer a high-performance platform for bond investments.

Communication Ten startups that will make noise in 2017 From an app to tell stories using fiction formats to a car insurance app to pay per mile traveled, startups are not lowering their guard in order to gain a foothold on the tech grid.

I Know First

This startup offers AI-based algorithmic prediction solutions to detect investment opportunities in the capital markets. I Know First’s algorithm development team includes Lipa Roitman, a scientist with more than 20 years of AI and ‘machine learning’ experience. Co-founder Yaron Golgher explains that the company’s proposal “is designed for large financial institutions, banks and hedge funds, as well as smaller investors.”

Scanovate

Scanovate has developed a solution that allows users to pay the printed bills they receive via regular mail, top-up their prepaid plan or verify their identity by simply pointing their mobile phone camera at the document.

Scanovate VP Products Guy Stiebel explains: “The application allows executing tasks much faster, customers can optimize their time, processes are simpler, safer and more user friendly. “

SecuredTouch

SecureTouch is working to make passwords a thing of the past with the goal of making device experience seamless and secure. This technology will allow devices (smartphones, cars, smart homes, watches or any other IoT product) to identify us simply by the way we interact. No passwords, no user IDs, no hassle – just us.

According to SecuredTouch VP Sales Assaf Pilo, “ With SecuredTouch, companies can actively keep customers transacting rather than identifying themselves. The technology provides real-time trust scores between 0-1000. “

Thetaray

ThetaRay is the leading provider of a large data analysis platform and cyber security, operational efficiency and risk detection solutions. This platform protects financial services and critical infrastructure against unknown threats.

Mario Cohen, Sales Director of the company, emphasized: “Our target are organizations whose operations in extremely heterogeneous and complex environments can benefit from risk detection features.”