

We are pleased to announce Reach Technology, Inc. is being acquired by Novanta, a leading global supplier of industrial and healthcare technology solutions.

Reach will continue to provide you with the highest quality products and customer support that continue to be the hallmarks of our business. Novanta shares our standards of service and operations. Our customers will benefit as we leverage their global resources.

Answers to common questions:

Why did Reach sell to Novanta? Reach has grown to the point where additional resources are needed to provide our high level of service to an expanding customer base. Reach management saw the opportunity to join forces with a company that shares the same customer-focused values. How do I place orders? Your ordering process won’t change. We still support phone, email, web shopping cart, and fax orders. All phone numbers and email addresses will remain the same. Will my sales contact change? No, we are not making any changes; you will continue to contact sales@reachtech.com to place orders. Will support change? No, Technical and Software Support will continue to be handled from our Oregon office. Are we still going to be able to get my product? Yes. No changes are being made to the Reach product line, or to our commitment to product longevity. Will lead times change? No. Will you still have the same long term support/availability? Yes. Will products change? All current products will continue to be produced, with new ones as they finish development.

About Novanta

Novanta (formerly GSI Group) is a leading global supplier of core technology solutions that give advanced industrial and healthcare OEMs a competitive advantage. Novanta combines deep expertise at the intersection of photonics and motion with a proven ability to solve complex technical challenges. This enables Novanta to engineer core components and sub-systems that deliver extreme precision and performance, tailored to our customers’ demanding applications. The company delivers highly engineered laser, vision and precision motion solutions to customers around the world. The driving force behind its growth is the team of innovative professionals who share a commitment to innovation and customer success. Novanta’s common shares are quoted on NASDAQ under the ticker symbol “NOVT”. Novanta.com