This is my review of the Casino in Aachen. For more information on this casino, please click here.

The casino in Aachen was the second casino in my journey to all European casinos. The official name of the casino is “Spielbank Aachen“. I got there on the 29th of June, 2012, at around 19:00. This time I had company.

The casino is situated on the Monheimsallee, which is easy to reach by car. There is a parking garage right next to the casino. The casino is within walking distance from the city center. However, from the central train station you better take a cab.

The Casino Aachen is located in a very impressive building. The building’s façade resembles a Roman temple. There is a nice park on one side of the casino. The congress center “Eurogress” is located on the other side of the casino.

Slots moved to the city center

The first thing I noticed was the sign saying that the slots hall was moved from the Casino Aachen to the city center (Kapuzinercarree).

We then passed through the huge Roman columns of the grand entry to the casino. We got into the lobby area where we were welcomed by the friendly receptionist.

Entrance to the casino is five Euros. You have to be at least 18 to enter and present a valid ID or Passport. There is no real dress code at the Casino Aachen anymore. You can get in with jeans and a polo shirt. I even saw young guys on the poker tables wearing jeans and t-shirt but I saw no one wearing trainers.

Poker Cash Game at the Casino Aachen

The Casino Aachen is one floor. To the left of the entrance, there are three large and spacy poker rooms. Poker cash games only start at 20:00. The poker rooms were empty when we arrived, and so we were allowed to inspect and take picture of the rooms. We counted 13 poker tables. We didn’t have time to wait until 20:00 because we wanted to visit another casino that same evening. As we left the Casino Aachen around 20:00 the poker tables started to fill with relatively young guys.

Live Table Games at the Casino Aachen

The live table games area of the Casino Aachen is located to the right of the entrance. We counted 12 American Roulette tables. Four tabled were open when we arrived, with limits of between 2 and 7000 Euros. The maximu changes acording to the type of bet you make. If you bet on plain, your maximum is 250 Euros, if you bet on simple chances it is 7,000 Euros.

There are screens above the roulette tables showing the results of the last draws in columns of red and black. Several players where using these screens to play trend follow strategies.

There was also one open blackjack table. The limits were between 5 and 250 Euros.

Smoking is not allowed in the casino. There is a smoking area located next to the bar in the live table games area. I had a cigarette there and found the atmosphere to be nice. There is a little bit of a cigarettes smell from the smoking area in the live table games area but it is not too bad. My girlfriend, who is very sensitive to cigarette smoke, found it acceptable.

I wasn’t in a mood for blackjack but my girl friend wanted to play roulette before leaving the casino. I was surprised by the system. It is basically a coin based system. At the table, we exchanged our money into color chips. The chips are differentiated based on their color alone and they have no indication of their money value on them. After the game we had to again exchange the color chips at the table into normal money chips and those we could then cash out at the cashier. I find the system a bit too burdensome.

The dealer and controller were very friendly and explained the game rules to my girlfriend in fluent English. Indeed the impression we got during our visit to the Casino Aachen is that the staff there is particularly friendly and helpful (but they were still no match to the blackjack dealer I had at the Viage casino in Brussels. This girl could calculate and smile kindly at you at the same time).

We couldn’t check the Club Zero at the casino that only opens later at night. The bar at the casino was course open and friendly. The casino’s restaurant at the exit looked welcoming despite the fact that no one sat there. The casino was starting to really fill up as we left.

Conclusion

The Casino Aachen has a historic appearance from the outside, modern from the inside and the staff is friendly and professional. However, I think it is a shame that the slots hall was removed to a different location and slots and the table games to be in the same area.

I would have liked to stay for a couple of rounds of Texas Holdem poker but I wanted to check the casino in Spa, Belgium, that evening. If I had known what awaits me at the Casino Spa, I would have stayed in Aachen.