On February 10th, an eclectic assortment of conservatives streamed into a ballroom in Washington to hear Rick Santorum speak. One woman handed out packages of Government Cluster Fudge (“Cut through the ‘RED TAPE’ and order today!”). Bloggers slung red N.R.A. tote bags over their shoulders. Tea Party supporters arrived, dressed in Colonial regalia and tricorn hats. Dozens of College Republicans took their seats. The occasion was the annual Conservative Political Action Conference, where the fifty-three-year-old Republican Presidential candidate from Pennsylvania was the star attraction. Three days earlier, Santorum’s supporters, mostly evangelical voters, had upended the G.O.P. race by powering his victories in Colorado, Minnesota, and Missouri. Santorum immediately jumped ahead of his rival in the national polls, making him the eleventh Republican leader in the past year. In previous years, Santorum likely wouldn’t have survived his dismal showing in New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Florida, three states that held primaries in January. But two developments this year have transformed the race: Romney’s unreliable conservatism, and the ability of rich benefactors to fund Super PACs that can keep campaigns alive. Santorum’s sugar daddy, Foster Friess, a wealthy Wisconsin businessman, introduced the candidate to the CPAC throngs. He began with a joke that elicited knowing guffaws: “A conservative, a liberal, and a moderate walk into a bar. The bartender says, ‘Hi, Mitt.’ ” Santorum, flanked by his wife and two of their daughters, had the glow of a man who had gone from Party runt to alpha male in a matter of weeks. He had a more serious message than the one Friess had delivered. “As conservatives and Tea Party folks, we are not just wings of the Republican Party,” he said. “We are the Republican Party.” Santorum’s CPAC declaration has the ring of truth. As Geoffrey Kabaservice writes in “Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party, from Eisenhower to the Tea Party,” his careful new history of moderate Republicanism, “The appearance of a Republican Party almost entirely composed of ideological conservatives is a new and historically unprecedented development. It is only in the last decade or so that movement conservatism finally succeeded in silencing, co-opting, repelling, or expelling nearly every competing strain of Republicanism from the party.” The polls back up Santorum and Kabaservice’s claim. In the past ten years, as self-proclaimed conservatives have increased from sixty-two per cent of the Republican Party to seventy-one per cent, the percentage of Republicans describing themselves as moderates has declined from thirty-one per cent to twenty-three per cent. The number who call themselves “liberal” is now close to the number who describe themselves as Aleut or Eskimo. The shift to the right has brought new, highly energized voters into the Party, which took over the House and gained six seats in the Senate in 2010. But it has also brought risks. In 2010, the Tea Party helped nominate oddball ideologues in Colorado, Delaware, and Nevada who probably ruined the Party’s opportunity to control the Senate; in 2011, brinkmanship by the new class of House Republicans nearly brought about a government default. This year, conservative forces have pushed the Presidential candidates to extremes. Santorum has talked about “the dangers of contraception” and criticized prenatal testing for women. He has called the President a “snob” for wanting every American to go to college. He said that he “almost threw up” when he read the 1960 speech in which John F. Kennedy declared that “the separation of church and state is absolute.” On immigration, the issue that will define the Republican Party’s relationship with Hispanics, the harsh rhetoric of Romney, Santorum, and Newt Gingrich has alarmed senior Republicans. Rudy Giuliani recently said that the candidates’ statements on some social issues “make the Party look like it isn’t a modern party.” Jeb Bush has lamented that the candidates were “appealing to people’s fears and emotion,” and wondered if he is still a member of the same tribe. “I used to be a conservative,” he said. Political parties aren’t supposed to act suicidal. For decades, the reigning theory held that politicians, not activists, defined the parties. These politicians were rational people who cared only about winning office. In his 1957 book, “An Economic Theory of Democracy,” Anthony Downs argued that candidates, in their Darwinian struggle to get elected in a two-party system, would cater, inevitably, to what Downs called “the median voter.” Even in a primary campaign, the powerful incentive of having to win over centrists in the general election should keep a candidate’s ideology in check. But, in the current Republican race, if the so-called median voter were mentioned at a debate, he would surely get booed. A more recent theory about parties better explains the G.O.P. race. In 2008, John Zaller, a political scientist at U.C.L.A., and three co-authors—Marty Cohen, David Karol, and Hans Noel—published an influential book, “The Party Decides,” in which they claim that Downs had it all wrong. The activists, not the candidates, are the crucial players who define and control a party. Interest groups and partisans, like the ones who organize and attend CPAC, care a great deal about policy and ideology, not just about electability, and they decide who gets nominated. Zaller and his colleagues dub them “intense policy demanders,” which, in today’s G.O.P., includes all the familiar factions: religious leaders, gun enthusiasts, business élites, anti-tax activists, foreign-policy hawks. Their mission is to find the most extreme candidate who can win. The ideal candidate is someone like George W. Bush. Party activists saw him as a conservative ally; swing voters, who, Zaller points out, aren’t sophisticated at detecting a candidate’s ideology, regarded him as a moderate. But sometimes activists don’t have a candidate like that, and they’re willing to risk defeat by backing someone far outside the mainstream. (This strategy can have its own payoff: in 1964, Barry Goldwater lost in a historic landslide, but he changed American politics.) “Parties want to be optimally extreme,” Zaller says. “They are like the frequent air traveller who believes that if he never misses a flight he is getting to the airport too soon.” This dynamic may help explain the ups and downs of the Republican primaries. Backing Mitt Romney is like showing up four hours early and sitting at Cinnabon; backing Rick Perry would have been like arriving at Newark International in the early evening for a flight that left LaGuardia at noon. And maybe, just maybe, backing Rick Santorum is like getting on the plane right before the doors close.

On a nearly cloudless day in late January, Newt Gingrich stood in front of the P.G.A. Museum of Golf, in Port St. Lucie, Florida, and addressed a modest crowd assembled on a putting green. Gingrich discussed unemployment and housing, then moved on to something closer to his heart. “I want to talk briefly about space,” he said. He gave a short history of the heroism of exploration, mentioning Sir Francis Drake, the sixteenth-century Englishman who circumnavigated the globe; Christa McAuliffe, who was killed in the 1986 Challenger explosion; the American astronaut Buzz Aldrin; and “self-orbital flight.” It was a typical Gingrichian tangent, but his review of America’s journey to the moon and beyond had a point. “Under the élites, the people who oppose me, some in the Democratic Party, some in the Republican,” he said, “under these élites we’ve become the America that couldn’t.” Soon, he was discussing the Panama Canal, overregulation, and the Second World War. As he linked his improbable candidacy to the defeat of the Nazis, a local man in the rear of the crowd, who said his name was Jim Balsade, began to shout that Gingrich was a “yellowbelly” and a “nut ball,” who was “making crazy statements.” These days, obnoxious hecklers are a feature of nearly every campaign speech. But a few feet away from Balsade stood three Republican members of the U.S. House of Representatives, who were regaling reporters with descriptions of Gingrich that were only mildly less flattering than Balsade’s. The Romney campaign had sent Mary Bono Mack, who since 1998 has represented the Palm Springs district formerly served by her late husband, Sonny Bono; Connie Mack, a Florida representative and Mary’s husband since 2007; and Charlie Bass, a moderate pro-choice Republican from New Hampshire, to follow Gingrich around Florida and remind reporters what an awful Speaker of the House he had been. A crucial faction of the Republican establishment had descended on Gingrich’s campaign in Florida, with the intent of destroying it. I asked Representative Bass if Gingrich had any redeeming qualities. “His greatest strength is he’s entertaining,” Bass said. “We just heard a speech in which, for thirty minutes, at least thirty different subjects were covered. He’s a wellspring of information. But this is a Presidential election.” He shook his head as he recounted a House Republican meeting about medical costs in the nineteen-nineties, in which Gingrich abruptly decided that the most important priority for the Party would be the elimination of diabetes. “Another time, we had a whole recess”—the period when members are back in their districts, usually armed with Party talking points—“devoted to ice buckets,” Bass said. “We were going to eliminate buckets of ice delivered to our congressional offices, because that was going to symbolize fiscal discipline. There are bigger issues in America than eliminating buckets of ice.” As Gingrich’s speech ended, Connie Mack politely excused himself. “I want to see what MC Hammer is saying,” he said, referring to Gingrich’s spokesman, R. C. Hammond, a genial young staffer who made a point of confronting the pro-Romney members of Congress after each Gingrich appearance. The encounters had become a ritual, and they sometimes left Hammond shaking with rage. Mack approached Hammond, clearly primed for his first debate of the day. Reporters moved into place, unholstering their cell phones and their mini-recorders. “Has Newt answered the question about Freddie Mac yet?” Mack demanded. “Is he going to? Is he a lobbyist?” As the confrontation escalated, Hammond sputtered something about a lobbyist tied to the Romney campaign who was “peddling influence,” but Mack talked over him: “Peddling is what Newt did when he was paid $1.6 million. He hasn’t answered the question. Why was he hired by the lead lobbyist, why was he hired as a lead lobbyist?” The two sides broke up. Hammond walked over to the Gingrich campaign bus, and the Macks were escorted to their vehicle by a young Romney staffer who was coördinating their travel to the next event. Meanwhile, Clay Walker’s country tune “All American” blasted over the loudspeakers. “I had a best friend with a funny last name and a weird accent,” he sang. “Now he’s an astronaut. We’re all American.”

More than ninety per cent of the ads that Mitt Romney and his allies ran in Florida were negative, though none were as pointed as Gingrich’s final phone campaign, in which he accused Romney of denying kosher meals to Holocaust survivors. In the end, Romney beat Gingrich by fifteen points, and Santorum by thirty-three. But, two weeks later, Santorum was the new leader in the national polls. At CPAC, when I ran into Connie Mack I pointed out that his work in Florida attacking Gingrich seemed to have paid off. “Now we just have to do the same thing to Santorum,” he said. Fratricidal primary campaigns have become so commonplace that it’s easy to forget that they are a relatively recent phenomenon. For much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, a small group of party leaders gathered at the quadrennial Conventions. They usually controlled the delegates, and negotiated over each party’s nominee, based on whatever mixture of electability, ideology, and politics they saw fit. One study of the 1952 election showed that eighty per cent of delegates to the two Conventions were selected by party insiders, with no participation by rank-and-file party members. Primaries were introduced at the turn of the century by Progressive reformers who wanted to open up the process. But only about a dozen states used them, and they were not always binding when they occurred. Candidates mainly entered them strategically, hoping to show strength to party bosses. The most famous primary victory of the mid-twentieth century probably took place in 1960, when John F. Kennedy, a Catholic, defeated Hubert Humphrey in West Virginia, which was heavily Protestant. “Could you imagine me, having entered no primaries, trying to tell the leaders that being a Catholic was no handicap?” Kennedy said at the time. The tumultuous Democratic Presidential campaign of 1968 changed the nominating process for both parties. Senator Eugene McCarthy entered and won most of the primaries, which Humphrey, who was the Vice-President at the time, avoided. He intended to win the old-fashioned way: by courting the Party elders. At the Convention in Chicago, Humphrey won the nomination on the first ballot, even as McCarthy supporters were being beaten by police outside the hall. In an attempt to unite the Party, Humphrey endorsed a commission to reform the nominating system. The commission’s recommendations, which the Democratic Party quickly adopted, required every state party to open up its delegate-selection process to ordinary voters through caucuses or primaries. The changes soon spilled over to the Republican Party as well. The impact, especially on the Democratic side, was both immediate and short-lived. In 1972, George McGovern seized his party’s nomination by blitzing the primaries and the caucuses with young antiwar voters. In 1976, Jimmy Carter, a little-known one-term governor, won Iowa and then wrapped up the nomination before anyone knew what had happened. When Averell Harriman, the former governor of New York and a longtime Party stalwart, was informed that Carter would likely be his party’s nominee, he replied, “Jimmy Carter? How can that be? I don’t even know Jimmy Carter, and as far as I know none of my friends know him, either.” On the Republican side that year, Ronald Reagan and Gerald Ford engaged in an ugly contest that may have cost Republicans the general election. Some political observers were alarmed by the manner in which McGovern and Carter had won, and in which Reagan challenged President Ford. In 1983, the political scientist Nelson Polsby published an influential treatise, “Consequences of Party Reform,” in which he argued that the reforms were crippling political parties by transferring power over the party’s most important function—nominating a Presidential candidate—to an unholy alliance of the press and media-savvy candidates. The rise of primaries would lead to nominees who mobilized small factions, rather than to those who knit together broad coalitions. Parties, Polsby insisted, had to have some “consensus-forcing institution,” like the deliberative Conventions. For some time, Polsby’s fears seemed overblown. The parties quickly adjusted to the new rules, and, in the eighties and nineties, a clear pattern emerged: the candidate favored by the establishment always won. There were no more insurgent nominees who hadn’t dined with the Averell Harrimans of the day. Zaller’s explanation for this trend, which has gained a significant following among political scientists, is that the “intense policy demanders,” who define the establishment in modern parties, have learned to master the new system by uniting behind the scenes in favor of one candidate. The new process was essentially an invisible and more complicated version of what took place in the old smoke-filled rooms at the Convention. In the months before voting begins, the most influential elements of each party’s coalition reach a rough consensus on their preferred nominee. Then, by means of endorsements, donations, media campaigns, and personal political networks, they steer voters toward the anointed candidate. It’s called the invisible primary: the yearlong campaign before Iowa, when candidates raise money, woo operatives, court elected officials, and try to win the loyalties of state political organizations. The invisible primary replaced the Convention as the consensus-forcing institution that Polsby insisted was necessary. Since 1980, according to Zaller’s book “The Party Decides,” the single best predictor of who wins the nomination has been the number of endorsements from Party officials that each candidate received in the months before voting began. The theory, however, appears to be breaking down. Hillary Clinton won the invisible primary in 2008 but lost the nomination. John McCain won the nomination without the backing of the conservative establishment. This year, the G.O.P.’s invisible primary was as unsettled as the actual primaries, and people have begun to wonder if the race will only be resolved at the Convention in Tampa, in August. What happens when a party can’t decide?

On the morning of February 4th, the day of the Nevada Republican caucuses, Republicans from Precinct 6665 gathered in a classroom decorated with characters from “Harry Potter” and Dr. Seuss at Spring Valley High, on the west side of Las Vegas. Caucuses bring out a minority of a minority to participate, and only thirty-eight people showed up. They were equally divided between men and women, and thirty-six of them were white. The precinct covers a slice of a community known as the Lakes, which consists of single-family homes nestled around man-made lagoons. The Romney forces were led by Erven T. Nelson, an attorney who had come with his wife, Lisa, and one of their seven children. The family has lived in the Lakes for twenty-five years and they are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, which has a substantial presence in Nevada, and strongly encourages its members to participate in politics. Nelson argued, essentially, that Romney could appeal to the median voter. “Governor Romney has the best chance of taking Republican principles to the White House, and also appealing to the independent vote, which is probably going to swing this election,” he said. At the back of the room, Maria Sullivan, who is ninety-one, made a gagging sound. “Romney is like a wilted flower,” she shouted. Her daughter Phyllis tried to silence her with an elbow—“Don’t start that!”—but Sullivan wouldn’t be quieted: “He’s just like a wilted flower. Unless you give him some water, he’s just like—” Sullivan, who is originally from the Lower East Side of Manhattan, and still sounds like it, stuck out her tongue and gagged again. “I like Gingrich, because he fights,” she said. The Gingrich faction was emboldened. “Look at the ads that are on television about Gingrich,” one man said. “Romney hasn’t taken them off, and I think they’re despicable. They’re only geared for a non-thinking-type person. And the non-thinking-type person has a lot of votes, especially in this town.” The Romney backers, who had largely remained silent, started to speak up. A woman raised her hand and asked politely if she could speak negatively about Gingrich. “I agree with one thing you said,” she continued. “Washington is full of slimeballs, and we need to get rid of them. But we don’t need to put them in the White House.” Romney won twenty-four votes to Gingrich’s eight, Santorum’s three, and Ron Paul’s three. Phyllis, who backed Santorum, told me that Romney won because of his religion. “This is L.D.S. territory, and Romney is L.D.S.,” she said. “They’ll support their own no matter what.” It was just the sort of caucus that critics of the system, including the late Polsby, feared. It had broken down into factions, based partly on religion. It had devolved into name-calling. Romney is often described as the establishment candidate in the Republican race, and he does lead his competitors in endorsements. But he has garnered them at a much slower pace than previous nominees, and one of the most significant parts of the Republican coalition, non-Mormon religious conservatives, has refused to get behind his candidacy. The shadowy establishment that is supposed to cue the voters has failed. When that happens, all the drawbacks of the post-reform primary system become more acute. Media stars like Michele Bachmann and Herman Cain have streaked across the political sky. The primaries have become more negative and personal. The potential nominees have been forced to adopt extreme positions. Some conservatives, reviewing this history and watching the 2012 race with a degree of horror, argue that the Party should scrap the current system—the spawn of turn-of-the-century Progressives and nineteen-sixties antiwar leftists—in favor of a deliberative Convention. “The sad truth is that Americans who lived and died 150 years ago—who didn’t have modern medicine, personal computers, cars, airplanes, easy access to higher education, ‘sophisticated’ manners and all the rest—had a much better party system than we do today,” Jay Cost, a writer at the Weekly Standard, recently wrote. “And the Republican Party is paying the price for this right now.”

Last Tuesday, on the eve of the Michigan and Arizona primaries, Santorum was searching for votes in the rural and religious precincts of western Michigan. This was the state in which Romney was born, and Santorum believed that he could transform the race by winning it. Hundreds of people queued up in below-freezing weather outside the Heritage Christian Academy, in Kalamazoo, to hear Santorum speak. Hundreds more were turned away when the school’s gymnasium filled up. A pastor named Paul Davis led the crowd in prayer. “We pray that you would give us a President who would defend the voiceless and the unborn,” Davis sermonized. “We pray that you would give us a President who would defend marriage the way you invented it. And, Lord, we pray that you would give us a President who would do what is right and not what is popular.” Santorum told the devout in Kalamazoo that the Obama Administration was a threat to their liberties, but that Romney would be only a minor improvement. “There’s this angst in America,” Santorum said. “Our freedoms are being taken away. Our economic freedom—Obamacare!” The crowd booed loudly. During the debate over Obama’s health-care bill, Santorum said, he bumped into the liberal broadcaster Juan Williams in the greenroom at the Fox News Channel studio in Washington. Williams, according to Santorum, said that he had just talked to someone at the White House, who told him why Obama was pushing so hard to pass the bill. “We believe Americans love entitlements, and once we get them hooked on this entitlement they will never let it go,” the unnamed Obama official allegedly confided. (A spokesperson for Fox says that this is quite different from what Williams actually told Santorum.) Santorum paused for a second to let the shock of this revelation settle in. “You see? That’s how they see you,” he said. “A group of people to be hooked. Like fish, like mindless fish who can just be snagged and then pulled around.” And, like Obamacare, Santorum explained, Romneycare was aimed at hooking fish and snuffing out religious liberty. “So much for freedom! Governor Romney imposed on Catholic hospitals a requirement that they have to provide the morning-after pill,” he said. The choice for Republicans, Santorum insisted, was just like the one they faced in 1980, when Ronald Reagan was ridiculed for being too extreme to defeat a sitting President. “The people in the Republican primaries realized that replacing Jimmy Carter with something just a little bit better wasn’t enough!” he shouted. “We are great. We’re Americans! We can do anything!” The crowd cheered. Santorum lost Michigan by three points, a margin that’s close enough to keep him competitive. The exit polls showed that the starkest divide among Republican voters was over the qualities they wanted in their nominee. Romney voters wanted someone who “has the right experience” or “can defeat President Obama”; Santorum voters desired someone who “is a true conservative” or “has strong moral character.”