Why does Sharia-Arab leaders not take Syrian Sunni-refugees?

Could this be part of Islam´s desire to rule the world?



Distribution of Syrian refugees in the middle East (The Washington Post 4 Sept. 2015).

The Following shocking video report by The Daily News Wire 2012 shows that most European countries will for demographic reasons be Muslim by 2040-2050.

This is in accordance with the commandments of the Koran:

Koran sura 9:33 It is He Who hath sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth, to proclaim it over all religion, even though the Pagans may detest (it).



Koran sura 33:27 And He made you heirs of their (unbelievers´) lands, their houses, and their goods, and of a land which ye had not frequented (before). And God has power over all things.

Koran sura 2:218 Those who believed and those who suffered exile and fought (and strove and struggled) in the path of God,- they have the hope of the Mercy of God: And God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

4.100 He who forsakes his home in the cause of God, finds in the earth Many a refuge, wide and spacious: Should he die as a refugee from home for God and His Messenger, His reward becomes due and sure with God: And God is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

3.195 And their Lord hath accepted of them, and answered them: “Never will I suffer to be lost the work of any of you, be he male or female: Ye are members, one of another: Those who have left their homes, or been driven out therefrom, or suffered harm in My Cause, or fought or been slain,- verily, I will blot out from them their iniquities, and admit them into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath;- A reward from the presence of God, and from His presence is the best of reward.

9:20 Those who believe, and suffer exile and strive with might and main, in God’s cause, with their goods and their persons, hav e the highest rank in the sight of God: they are the people who will achieve (salvation).

9:21 Their Lord doth give them glad tidings of a Mercy from Himself, of His good pleasure, and of gardens for them, wherein are delights that endure:

9:22 They will dwell therein for ever. Verily in God’s presence is a reward, the greatest (of all).

Comment:

Saudi Arabian leadership are clever: They don´t take Muslim refugees – but let them colonize Europe – financing their mosques with our oil money – and wait for the day when their Muslim religious centre (Mekka) can rule the world. And we tolerate and import Muslims en masse even pay for them – even drive them up here by shattering their homes as part of an ethnic cleansing of white Europeans and the establishment of intolerant Sharia. That is the satanic NWO fulfilling the Coudenhove Kalergi/Sarkozy plan of a Europe of mongrels and without Followers of Christ – as prescribed by Adam Weishaupt and Mayer Amschel Rothschild. Christian churches promote this development and here – Lutheran Churches, too. For they are widely no longer Christian – but Masonic Luciferians.