

For the fourth year in a row, Scientology has aired one of its ads in some local markets during the Super Bowl. And, as usual, the ad has produced a lot of hilarity on Twitter as viewers around the country react in pretty much the same way: “Was that really a Scientology ad I just saw?” This year is no different, as you’ll see in the Twitter reactions below. But first, let’s review the ad itself first.

As in past years, Scientology saved money by only buying local-market spots in some areas, which we have been told adds up to about a $1 million cost, rather than airing a 30-second national ad, which this year ran about $5 million.

Which cities got the ad? We’ll have to judge from the Twitter reactions. But in the past, Scientology leader David Miscavige has aired the ads in cities where his local members have put up the cash to open an “Ideal Org” as a way to punish those cities that haven’t yet ponied up for a new church.

Do these ads actually help the church recruit new people? Probably not. They’re just too hilariously bizarre to rope in newbies. Our experts tell us the ad is really aimed at existing members, to convince them that their donations are being spent to propagate Scientology.

Advertisement

OK, so here’s the minute-long version of the 30-second ad you saw on television…





We live in an age of technological wonder

Extended life

Endless connections

Limitless possibilities

At the touch of a button

In a fraction of a second

The world’s knowledge at our fingertips

A seemingly infinite source of answers

To any question we might ask

Except for one

The one we thirst for

The one that leads to understanding

Our world

Our choices

Ourselves

The question that lies at the intersection of technology and spirituality

Advertisement Who am I?

And some reactions…



——————–

Posted by Tony Ortega on February 7, 2016 at 20:20

E-mail tips and story ideas to tonyo94 AT gmail DOT com or follow us on Twitter. We post behind-the-scenes updates at our Facebook author page. After every new story we send out an alert to our e-mail list and our FB page.

Our book, The Unbreakable Miss Lovely: How the Church of Scientology tried to destroy Paulette Cooper, is on sale at Amazon in paperback and Kindle editions. We’ve posted photographs of Paulette and scenes from her life at a separate location. Reader Sookie put together a complete index. More information about the book, and our 2015 book tour, can also be found at the book’s dedicated page.

Learn about Scientology with our numerous series with experts…

BLOGGING DIANETICS: We read Scientology’s founding text cover to cover with the help of L.A. attorney and former church member Vance Woodward

UP THE BRIDGE: Claire Headley and Bruce Hines train us as Scientologists

GETTING OUR ETHICS IN: Jefferson Hawkins explains Scientology’s system of justice

SCIENTOLOGY MYTHBUSTING: Historian Jon Atack discusses key Scientology concepts

Other links: Shelly Miscavige, ten years gone | The Lisa McPherson story told in real time | The Cathriona White stories | The Leah Remini ‘Knowledge Reports’ | Hear audio of a Scientology excommunication | Scientology’s little day care of horrors | Whatever happened to Steve Fishman? | Felony charges for Scientology’s drug rehab scam | Why Scientology digs bomb-proof vaults in the desert | PZ Myers reads L. Ron Hubbard’s “A History of Man” | Scientology’s Master Spies | Scientology’s Private Dancer | The mystery of the richest Scientologist and his wayward sons | Scientology’s shocking mistreatment of the mentally ill | Scientology boasts about assistance from Google | The Underground Bunker’s Official Theme Song | The Underground Bunker FAQ

Our Guide to Alex Gibney’s film ‘Going Clear,’ and our pages about its principal figures…

Jason Beghe | Tom DeVocht | Sara Goldberg | Paul Haggis | Mark “Marty” Rathbun | Mike Rinder | Spanky Taylor | Hana Whitfield