Shabazz Muhammad said it and didn't react to the irony of his own words.

"I'm a hungry guy," the Timberwolves small forward said of his desire to get better.

Except that he isn't.

Muhammad has definitely gotten better, but by changing his eating habits. He has gone from a fastbreak of double cheeseburgers as a rookie to dedicating himself to chicken salad, from approximately 245 pounds to 215 the second season, from out of shape as late as summer league last July to beach workouts that left him puking on the sands of Santa Monica, Calif., and because of it has gone from a focus of criticism to re-affirming his spot as part of the Minnesota future.

I want to be the best I can be and the best in the league. – Shabazz Muhammad

Taking advantage of the consistent big minutes with the Timberwolves down three injured starters, Muhammad has at least 18 points in nine of the last 14 games, pushing his season-long average to 13.9, after 3.9 in a rookie season filled with stretched on the bench and in the D-League. This is the offensive firepower Minnesota envisioned with the 14th pick in the 2013 Draft and this is the level of play Muhammad imagined as he endured month after month of condemnation in dropping from the possible No. 1 pick at the start of the season to the end of the lottery and underwhelming rookie.

Last season, he said, was the culmination of the pressure of the constant spotlight from high school in Las Vegas to UCLA as a mega-recruit to NBA first-round pick. In college, there was the strange story of records wrongly showing Muhammad a year too young and his father mistaking when and where Shabazz was born, part of what Muhammad would come to call "conspiracies" by outsiders against him. Once in the pros, there was the emotion toll of his father's legal issues that led to Ronald Holmes being sentenced in March to 37 months in federal prison in a mortgage-fraud scheme.

Muhammad's usual release of getting on the court was not available -- he could barely get on the court. Instead, he ate himself to a weight that once seemed unimaginable. He heard the dissections that he was a selfish player and, as 2013-14 slipped away, that Minnesota would regret the choice.

It has all made this season that much more satisfying. Not only is Muhammad offering a reminder of why he was so highly regarded in the first place, it comes with the bonus of answering back at critics. The first NBA proof that he can play has special personal value beyond the obvious basketball impact of another young threat for the Timberwolves even after shooting guard Kevin Martin returns and possibly pushes Andrew Wiggins back to small forward, Muhammad's spot.

Question: It looks like you've really found a rhythm. What exactly is happening now that wasn't before?

Answer: Just opportunity. Last year I didn't get a lot of opportunity to play and I'm getting a lot of minutes now. I think it's opportunity and taking my time on offense and defense. I think I'm doing a pretty good job.

Q: What has been the biggest difference from last season to this season?

A: I would say it's been my weight. I feel so much better running up and down the floor. That's something that was really good for me. My athletic ability has really come in there since I lost about 30 pounds.

Q: What did you do in the summer to lose 30 pounds?

A: I worked out with this guy (Frank Matrisciano) that used to work out with Blake Griffin for two years. He really got my weight where it needed to be and got me stronger and it really helped me out a lot. It was a lot of sand work. A lot of running, medicine balls. It was a lot of stuff. I loved doing it. Like I said, Blake Griffin did it for two years and his game went to the next level. It's something I can't wait to have also.

Q: Why then? What prompted you to say, "I need to make a change"?

A: I didn't feel right. In high school and college and stuff, I was like 215, 220 and I could really move. When I was 245 last year, from not playing also, I didn't feel it was my right weight. Right when I got to this weight, I started to move and dunk like I used to do and all that. It's been really good.

Q: Is there any part of you that feels you wasted last season because you let yourself go?

A: Yeah, I think so. It had a lot to do when I got drafted. A lot of conspiracies with college and stuff like that. It kind of motivated to get where I'm at now. I think it really helped me out a lot. Now my journey is really the way I see it. I'm really pleased with it.

Q: Motivated you how?

A: Last year I wasn't playing. I went to the D-League. I had a lot of doubters. A lot of people thought I was going to be a bust and stuff like that. And now I get my opportunity and I'm doing a pretty good job with it. I'm really pleased. Now hopefully we can start winning some games. I know we're a young team, but we're really coming along together.

Q: Is there any part of the weight gain that you think may have been related to being in a bad mood? Is that how you dealt with it?

A: Yeah. I was in a bad mood a lot. Especially with stuff that had to do with my dad. That had a lot to do with it. Not playing. Like I said, it was mostly stuff to do with my dad and it really hurt me just seeing that stuff.

Q: What he did hurt you or what people were saying?

A: What people were saying. It was a lot of criticism there and it kind of made our relationship kind of go down. I look back at it now and I'm doing really good. I'm really pleased with my performance.

Q: Do you think the eating was partly your way of dealing with it?

A: Definitely. I think it was eating. Going out. A lot of that stuff. Not playing. And then I went to the D-League. There was a lot of stress on me, especially when I was growing up being the No. 1 player all the time in high school and stuff like that. It was really hard for me. And like I said, just not playing. That's something that really hurt me a lot.

Q: How's your relationship with him now?

A: It's good. He doesn't really deal so much with my basketball. I think that's a good thing. He's just being a dad now. I've taken my own thing in my own hands. That's the best thing to do.

Q: You're obviously doing better physically. But it sounds like emotionally and mentally you're also in a much better place than a year ago. Compare how you were feeling last season to how you are feeling this season.

A: I think it has a lot to do with opportunity. Coach has a lot of trust in me. I've been doing really well, I think, on the offensive and defensive end. I'm young, only 22, so I can only get better. I've been trying to keep working hard and keep working on my game.

Q: Is there any part of you that's trying to stick it to all the doubters?

A: You always try to. There were a lot of doubters last year. I always knew I can play in the NBA and was an NBA player. Now it's crazy because a lot of people are starting to say good things now who were doubting me. It's also a good thing. I'm just happy to have this opportunity now and to be in this place where I'm at.

Q: Do you take it in stride and say, "Everyone has doubters"? Or how much of you is saying, "Don't come and say nice things about me now when coming into the draft and as a rookie you were killing me"?

A: It is what it is. It's a little bit of both. A lot of people were good people to me and then they saw I wasn't playing they had a lot of doubts about me. That was really hard for me. I pretty much stuck with it. That's the most impressive thing about myself. I stuck with it and got out of it right.

Q: Did that hurt you or did it motivate you?

A: It motivated me, definitely. I'm hungry. I'm a hungry guy. I want to be the best I can be and the best in the league. To do that, you've got to work hard every day and play hard.

Q: Is the way you played the last (few weeks) what you feel like you can be all the time?

A: Definitely. Playing like that is definitely comfortable. Other teams are starting to scout me and now I've just got to keep working on my game and do the things I need to do to be successful.

Scott Howard-Cooper has covered the NBA since 1988. You can e-mail him here and follow him on Twitter.

The views on this page do not necessarily reflect the views of the NBA, its clubs or Turner Broadcasting.