We are ENKKO and we are in process of creating quality repair parts for the Nintendo 64 controller. To prepare these parts for releasing to the market, we need to make molds of the parts needed. Each professionally done mold allows us to properly recreate the parts just as they were 13 years ago. After we have the mold, we can finally test different plastic materials and start reproducing the toggle stick and the bowl it sits on.

We have planned out what we need to bring these parts to fruition. However, we ran out of funding and are in need of help to keep the project moving.

That is why we have created this campaign on Kickstarter so you can also be part of the creation of these parts.

WHAT ARE THESE PARTS? HOW DO THEY FUNCTION?

All the parts located inside the joystick case are displayed below. Some of the parts are due to rough wear and tear during play.

Each of these parts work along with the optical encoding disks to send data to the system registering each action.

There are four main parts to the toggle stick in the whole case beneath the casing.

The gears wear over time but not as extreme as the bowl and toggle stick.

At the bottom of the bowl is where the end of the stick touch and rub each other. As you push the stick from side to side, up and down; it gradually wears down the end of the stick and bottom of the bowl causing dust to build up. This erosion renders the controller unusable as the movements you make don't register with accuracy to the system.

So we scanned and 3D printed a prototype to start reversing the process.

It worked for the most part, they were both made out of the rough material nylon. The reason is the bowl did not fit because the nylon was not smooth and the other parts could not move correctly. However, the toggle stick worked perfectly and would say it was a 90% replica of the OEM stick. If it was smoothened out, it would be a 100% replica.

So i purchased a plastic injection machine and decided to recreate it as they did in the large manufacturing factories before. A couple challenges were in front of me such as getting the materials, practicing with the machine, and finishing an aluminum mold.

Here is how a mold would look like with a fishing lure.

This is where you come in. In order to get the additional equipment and molds, we need your help to push us further to the goal.

OUR TIMELINE

HOW CAN I HELP?

If you can spread the word on social media such as Facebook, Twitter, Reddit or retro forums, you would be doing us a huge favor! The more people we can reach, the stronger the 64 community becomes.

You can also donate or choose one of our rewards to be the first to receive the repair parts. You are not just helping ENKKO but the community as we all benefit from having fun in playing our favorite N64 games.

Credits: Yusuke Tsutsumi - The Beach