Yeezus. Kanye West flew to NYC to visit Donald Trump at Trump Tower in NYC on Tuesday, December 13, Us Weekly can confirm.

In a video obtained by C-SPAN, the rapper, 39, is seen smiling as he walks with his entourage into the building in midtown Manhattan. He's wearing a black sweatshirt, sweatpants and is rocking his new blond hair.

After their meeting, the two posed together for photos. "We've been friends for a long time," Trump, 70, told reporters. "Life, we discuss life." West, meanwhile, refused to answer questions. "I just want to take a picture right now," he said, laughing.

The two then shook hands and hugged. "You take care of yourself, I'll see you soon," Trump told West. Trump's eldest daughter, Ivanka Trump, also took part in the meeting.

Contrary to reports, a source tells Us that West is not being considered for a role to work with Trump. Trump and West spoke about life and exchanged ideas. The musician is in NYC to take meetings and to look at new apartments.

Per TMZ, the Secret Service weren't worried about their interaction. "Personal problems that Mr. West is working through does not establish him as a security threat to President-elect Trump," a Secret Service official told the site. Trump's team also gave the go ahead and the two chatted for 15 minutes.

The meeting takes place nearly two weeks after West was released from the UCLA Medical Center after a nine-day stay for extreme exhaustion. As previously reported, a source told Us Weekly that his workload, stress over wife Kim Kardashian's Paris robbery and the anniversary of the death of his mother, Donda, death led to his breakdown.

Last month, West revealed during his Saint Pablo tour that he didn't vote in the presidential election. However, if he did, he would have voted for the business mogul — one of the celebs depicted lying in a giant bed, nude, with the likes of Taylor Swift, Kim Kardashian, West and others in his "Famous" music video.



WATCH: Donald Trump and Kanye West appear together at Trump Tower https://t.co/Qld6MSme9j — NBC News (@NBCNews) December 13, 2016

"I told y’all I didn’t vote, right? What I didn’t tell you … if I were to have voted I would have voted on Trump," he said during his rant on November 17. He added that he "loved" Trump and described him as a "f‑‑king genius."

Watch West's arrival to Trump Tower in the video above.

Story is still developing. Check back for updates.

Sign up now for the Us Weekly newsletter to get breaking celebrity news, hot pics and more delivered straight to your inbox!

Want stories like these delivered straight to your phone? Download the Us Weekly iPhone app now!