Hey there! We are Soothsayer Hot Sauce, a small batch hot sauce company from Chicago. Though we are just starting out, we are confident in saying that we are the premiere mystic-themed hot sauce company in Chicago, if not the world. Soothsayer might also be the only mystic-themed hot sauce company but that's besides the point. All of our sauces are all natural, gluten free, allergen free, vegan, and tasty as hell. Our bottling is done by hand and each bottle is numbered for batch and bottle number. We pride ourselves on three things: fresh & locally sourced ingredients, an exceptional flavor profile, and an accessible level of heat. These are not the sauces for a Scoville scale strongman; we make products for everyone to enjoy. Our sauces act as an excellent accent flavor with just the right amount of heat. Speaking of our sauces, let's introduce them.

Our Sauces

Our Big 3 Sauces: Harbinger, Perdition, and Omen.

Harbinger:

A roasted red pepper base serves to mellow out the fiery manzano pepper and give the sauce nice, savory balance. Touches of garlic and onion help add some depth of flavor and makes this an excellent sauce for Italian leaning foods. Coming from a city obsessed with pizza, we had to make sure we did this one right.

Perdition:

This is the sauce that started the idea for making Soothsayer a legitimate business. An all orange habanero sauce, Perdition started as a prototype called 'Orange Crush' as it features orange habaneros, carrots, and orange bell peppers. The sweetness of the carrots and bell peppers is balanced by the tang and spice of the habaneros to give this sauce a truly unique flavor. Higher on our spice scale, this sauce is still accessible to almost all who have tried it so far. This is an incredibly versatile sauce and will become an instant staple in your fridge.

Omen:

Based on a traditional Mexican salsa verde, Omen is our workhorse sauce and one of our most popular. Packed with jalapeños and garlic, it provides a little bit of kick with a whole lot of taste. Though the least spicy of the three, it has proved to be one of the most popular as it will become almost impossible to eat a plate of eggs or indulge in Taco Tuesday without it.

Who We Are

Hi! My name is Kyle and I like hot sauce, tattoos, punk rock, and hot sauce.

The idea for Soothsayer was inspired by years of punk and metal shows in dive bars, dumpy venues, old basements, and wherever else music can be played. Not to sound overly cliche, but the do it yourself attitude is infectious and the support of the people in these communities is inspiring. So I said 'to hell with it' and started making hot sauce. And people started responding to it. Earlier this year I sent out samples of these three sauces to over 25 different states and was flooded with reviews, feedback, pictures of what people used it on, and one other surprising thing...the request for more. I knew that I enjoyed our unique, fresh flavors but I wasn't sure how others would respond. Here's a few of those:

"I am lucky enough to live in Chicago and was able to score some early samples of Soothsayer Sauce, to my delight. As someone who consumes at LEAST 2 different types of hot sauce on all my meals daily, I have a pretty high bar for the new wave of craft stuff. Soothsayer delivers! I've tried most of the line and they have a wide range of diverse flavors — I'm especially a fan of the citrusy, sorta-sweet Perdition, and to be honest don't think I'll ever be able to eat pizza again without the jalapeno-garlic Omen drizzled on top. Soothsayer has bite (especially Harbinger) but walks the burn-your-tongue-off line, so that you can actually nuanced flavors in each." -Lindsay Turano



"[In reviewing Perdition] The spiciest of the three, this orange-habanero marvel has the delightfully fruity notes from both the citrus and the peppers, a respectable amount of heat, along with a savory undertone of onion and garlic. The full, fresh flavor of the chiles is perfectly presented alongside tangy, savory, and sweet elements, all playing in a harmonious unison." -Phil "El Rojo Loco" (one of the original sample recipients)



An Ode to Soothsayer (to the tune of 'My Favorite things)

"Tacos, Burritos, and Cruchy Style Cheetos,

Burgers, and Sausage, and Chicken Taquitos,

Mixed into Soups and tossed on chicken wings,

These are this hot sauces favorite things!



When it lacks spice, and the meats dry,

When it just tastes bad, I simply remember what harbinger brings,

Soothsayer makes food so rad."

-Beautifully composed by Seth Beavis of Blue Steel

With such a positive response to our all natural sauces, I couldn't help but feel the need to continue on and try to bring these flavors to as many people as I can. And it is with that spirit of support and accessibility that we wish to continue, as we grow, to encourage independent ventures across Chicago; as a combination of culinary, artistic, and musical ideas. Through pop up cooking events, art shows with the involvement of local musicians, or events that feature a bit of all three. We at Soothsayer strongly feel that everything is best done when you bring up those around you, and we strive to create experiences that embody that ideal.

Our Rewards

You've been introduced to the sauces. Now let's take a look at the other items involved in our rewards, that we will be producing here in Chicago...either by ourselves or with some of our favorite local artists and merchants.

The Soothsayer Ouija shirt. Hand screened by our designer Shane Zobel, of Wayfare Clothing.

We belive in warm hands and cold beers.

Speaking of frosty beverages, what better place to temporarily house them in then a custom etched pint glass?

Your denim vest is looking a little lonely...

Combined with a set of custom stickers...you can't go wrong with this on your collar.

The biggest of thanks to those who helped bring all of this together:

Shane Zobel - Designs and Printing

Noah Schloss - Video and Editing

Luhrs Heldrich - Photography and Product Shots

Chris Woods - Custom Pint Etching

I highly encourage you to check out the works of these incredibly talented, unbelievably committed artists for anything you could need in the design and creative mediums.