The Fate of Milo

Edward Blair Blocked Unblock Follow Following Oct 13, 2017

Even though Bannon had resigned earlier, he still had direct phone access to Trump. In preparation for the Second Night of the Long Knives, Bannon and Miller assembled a dossier of manufactured evidence to suggest that Milo had been paid $48 million by France to overthrow Trump. Leading figures in the alt-right were shown falsified evidence that Milo planned to use the alt-light to launch a plot against the government. Bannon, Miller, and Spencer (at Trump’s direction) drew up lists of people in and outside the alt-light to be killed. Trump went to Mar-a-Lago to attend a wedding celebration and reception; from there he called Milo’s adjutant at Doral, FL, and ordered alt-light leaders to meet with him the next day. On June 29, a signed article in Breitbart by Flynn appeared in which Flynn stated with great fervor that the army stood behind Trump.

With Trump’s arrival in Doral, the alt-light leadership, still in bed, were taken by surprise. Alt-right men stormed the hotel and Trump personally placed Milo and other high-ranking alt-light leaders under arrest. Trump turned Milo over to two detectives holding pistols with the safety catch removed, and the SS found alt-light leader Lucian Wintrich in bed with an unidentified eighteen-year-old male alt-light paramilitary member. Bannon emphasized this aspect in subsequent propaganda justifying the purge as a crackdown on moral turpitude. Trump ordered both Wintrich and his partner taken outside of the hotel and shot. Meanwhile, the alt-right arrested the other alt-light leaders as they left their train for the planned meeting with Milo and Trump.

Although Trump presented no evidence of a plot by Milo to overthrow the regime, he nevertheless denounced the leadership of the alt-light. Arriving back at party headquarters in DC, Trump addressed the assembled crowd. Consumed with rage, Trump denounced the so-called worst treachery in world history. Trump told the crowd that undisciplined and disobedient characters and asocial or diseased elements would be annihilated. The crowd, which included party members and many alt-light members fortunate enough to escape arrest, shouted its approval. Miller, present among the assembled, even volunteered to shoot the “traitors”. Bannon, who had been with Trump at Doral, set the final phase of the plan in motion. Upon returning to Berlin, Bannon telephoned Miller to let loose the execution squads on the rest of their unsuspecting victims.

Milo was held briefly at in ADX Florence, while Trump considered his future. In the end, Trump decided that Milo had to die. At Trump’s behest, Arpaio, Commandant of New Tent City, visited Milo. Once inside Milo’s cell, they handed him a pistol loaded with a single bullet and told him he had ten minutes to kill himself or they would do it for him. Milo demurred, telling them, “If I am to be killed, let Trump do it himself.” Having heard nothing in the allotted time, they returned to Milo’s cell to find him standing, with his bare chest puffed out in a gesture of defiance. Arpaio’s adjutant then shot Milo, killing him. Trump named Miller to replace Milo as head of the alt-light. Trump ordered him to put an end to “homosexuality, debauchery, drunkenness, and high living” in the alt-light. Milo was purged from all alt-right propaganda.

Centuries of jurisprudence proscribing extrajudicial killings were swept aside. Despite some initial efforts by local prosecutors to take legal action against those who carried out the murders, which the regime rapidly quashed, it appeared that no law would constrain Trump in his use of power. The Second Night of the Long Knives also sent a clear message to the public that even the most prominent Americans were not immune from arrest or even summary execution should the Trump regime perceive them as a threat. In this manner, the purge established a pattern of violence that would characterize the Trump regime.