The next Thor and Alien blockbusters will be made in Australia, Foreign Minister Julie Bishop has announced.

Homegrown Hollywood heartthrob Chris Hemsworth will be among reasonably familiar surroundings when he reprises the title role of Thor in the Marvel superhero franchise, while the production of an untitled Alien film would bring famed director Ridley Scott to our shores.

Ms Bishop announced the government had signed a deal to bring the two films to Australian shores, this afternoon.

"During recent visits to both Los Angeles and New York, I met with senior executives of major film and production houses, with Walt Disney Company, Marvel, 20th Century Fox, Warner Brothers, Village Roadshow, NBC Universal and directors Ridley Scott and Brett Ratner who all expressed a very keen desire to invest in significant new film production projects right here in Australia," she said.

"They specifically spoke about the value in Australia as a filming destination, the quality and variety of our locations, but more importantly our highly qualified and talented workforce, our embrace of innovative technology, our stable economy, our dollar, all this makes Australia an attractive destination."

Exact filming locations have not yet been decided by the production companies involved.

"But I particularly wanted to thank my ministerial colleagues Steve Ciobo, Stu Roberts and Karen Andrews because they have been fierce advocates for more film production and post production opportunities for the Gold Coast," she said.

"Sir Ridley Scott told me he knows the Fox Studios very well and knows NSW well, so we're hoping for some good news there."

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull was praised by Arts Minister Mitch Fifield for his efforts in securing the deals.

"The PM has taken a minute-by-minute interest in this venture," he said.

"He was determined to see that this would be landed, and I think the announcement that we are making today is a concrete example of what the PM means when he talks about the agility of government, the agility of industry, to support innovation and to deliver jobs."

© Nine Digital Pty Ltd 2019