In the history and mythology of the Second World War, the Battle Of Britain has an important emotional and pivotal role. For around four months through the summer and fall of 1940, a titanic struggle for air supremacy exploded in the air over Britain.

Philip Brown/Reuters

Hitler hoped that his air force would destroy, if not irreversibly cripple, British planes. Once his air superiority over the British isles was established, Hitler planned, the British would either surrender or succumb to invasion.

What follows is the stuff of legend, one of history’s classic good versus evil battles. A beleaguered Britain was pounded but refused to give up. And eventually in October the Luftwaffe withdrew and Britain survived.

Since then one particular British aircraft has always been credited with the victory: the Supermarine Spitfire. The Spitfire was designed as a sleek, sexy, speedy fighter and the first to be made entirely out of metal. In the world of fighter aircraft, the Spitfire was the Porsche or the Ferrari of its day. Boys dreamed of flying one. Children had posters of Spitfires up on their walls, and memorized makes and models and modifications.

This is grave injustice. Because while the Spitfire played a critical role in the battle, greater credit must go to another ungainly, unfashionable, unsexy aircraft: the Hawker Hurricane. It was slow, heavy and, compared to the Spitfire, ugly.

But the Hurricane was the RAF’s workhorse during the battle. More Hurricanes took to the skies than Spitfires. The Hurricanes shot down more German planes — almost 60 percent of total losses — than Spitfires. And the ramshackle Hurricanes took much more punishment: around 600 Hurricanes were shot down compared to Spitfire losses of around 350.

A brief profile of the Hawker Hurricane:

Rahul Dravid, you can’t help but feel, is the Hawker Hurricane of Indian cricket.

Last week, Mr. Dravid played his last 50-over cricket match in Indian colors. Having retired from all other forms, he will now only play Test Cricket.

In the days leading up to that match, and in the days after, much has been written about this unsung stalwart of the Indian cricket team. An omnipresent theme in all of the coverage has been that Mr. Dravid never has, and probably never will, get the credit due to him.

While Mr. Dravid is a Spitfire in the five-day format, in the shorter affair he has always been seen a slow, square peg in a rapacious, round hole. When forced to accelerate, he had a tendency to lose the fluidity that came naturally to him. We winced when he swung and he missed.

But few Indian cricketers are loved so universally. So we were always wincing with him. Not at him. “Why,” I’ve thought so many times, “are we making him debase himself with this nonsense.”

Unfortunately, for a man who has scored almost 11,000 runs in the ODI format, Mr. Dravid’s reputation is oddly one of someone who struggled to do well in the format. As Sidvee points out in his nostalgic blog post, even when Mr. Dravid did perform in a match, his performance was rarely definitive and usually overshadowed.

Also, perhaps, Mr. Dravid has been given a frustrating nickname: “The Wall.”

Walls are passive. Walls don’t react. Walls just stand there soaking up punishment without retaliating. Walls don’t back down, or step up.

But Rahul Dravid always stepped up. He never backed down. Rahul Dravid ran and ran till perspiration flowed from his face.

And Rahul Dravid reacted plenty. Usually in one of two ways. Sometimes, when he took a catch or scored a century he reacted with this odd ferocity. You can almost sense his teeth gnashing.

After running out Inzamam, a fierce Rahul Dravid keeps running and running:

Other times Mr. Dravid would break into the most wonderful smile ever smiled on a sporting ground. All the dourness and gritty determination that marked his batting would vanish, and his happy face and toothy grin would radiate a nation’s worth of happiness.

Rahul Dravid beams after picking up a rare ODI wicket off his bowling:

Teeth everywhere after taking a then-record 182nd Test catch:

Rahul Dravid was never the Spitfire. Few posters of him will go up. And perhaps few young cricketers will memorize his statistics and grow up aspiring to be the next Rahul Dravid.

But history and Youtube videos and cricket statistics will show that in some of Indian cricket’s most dire moments of crisis the Wall was our Hurricane.

So, who do you think is the most under appreciated Indian cricketer of all times ?