Fractal 2: GRLM I slowly climbed off the airship and took my first step on a different world. While I had known only trees, this world was dominated by the very same pillars of metal that I had read about within the forbidden books. "Amazing…" I found myself muttering. Ozpin smiled, handing me a cup of some black liquid. "Here, have some coffee. You've had a long day." I took a sip from the cup, cringing at the bitter flavor. "Gross." He reached into his pocket, handing me three cups of something. Popping them open, I poured them into my cup. He gently stuck in a straw, stirring it for me over the slow whirring blades of the air ship. "Try that." I took a sip. It was good. With a smile, I looked at the headmaster with curiosity, hoping he would explain this complex world to me. Instead, however, he simply walked forward without looking at me. "Feel free to explore. You can find a new set of clothes in your dorm." I looked down at the clothes he had given me. They were by no means nice, but the were far superior to the rags I had been living in for the past few years. "What's a dorm?" He chuckled, taking a sip of some black liquid from his cup. "It’s a room in an academy where some people live. I suppose you haven't had a dorm assigned yet, have you? No matter, tomorrow will begin initiation. Simply explore around until then. If you would like a place to sleep, you can certainly join my cabin for the time being." "No thank you." "I thought as much. Anyways, feel free to explore a bit. Try not to go to the library yet, as I know you'll never return once you enter. Or am I wrong?" "Probably not." He nodded. "Then explore and get to know the people on campus. Tomorrow will decide who you work with until graduation, so I hope you get along well with others." "Do you know who your talking to?" "Ah, yes. I suppose it should be considered a miracle you can speak, even though you are very intelligent." "And how can you tell that?" "I've already explained. You are Raven's child and so thusly I've been keeping an eye on you. The role you and her children play may not be present right now, but will be all too important in the longer game." "Don't treat me like a tool." He chuckled. "Of course not, I'm the headmaster. I care for each student more than my own life. That's why you should just have fun for today, and explore." "I still don't know what exactly you want from me." "Its simple, really. You know more about this world than anyone else, thanks to Raven's teachings. We will create a symbiotic relationship. Do you know what that means?" "Of course I do. Its two members of different species that act to the benefit of another, and receive benefits for that." He nodded his head, taking a slow sip of his drink.