Seven in 10 Americans say the overall tone and level of civility has declined in the U.S. since President Donald Trump was elected. (Carolyn Kaster/AP)

Americans believe political discourse in the United States has become worse in the months since Donald Trump was elected president, while trust in the administration, Congress and the media remains low.

Seven in 10 Americans say they believe the overall tone and level of civility has devolved since November, compared with just 6 percent who see things as improving and 20 percent who say they haven't changed, according to a new Marist Poll conducted on behalf of PBS NewsHour and NPR.

That's a significant shift from eight years ago, when former President Barack Obama was in the early months of his first term: In July 2009, 35 percent of adults said politics between Republicans and Democrats in Washington had become less civil, while 21 percent said they thought civility had improved and a plurality – 42 percent – said they thought it had mostly stayed the same.

The new poll also shows that relatively few voters trust Trump's administration, and even fewer have trust in Congress.

Just 37 percent of adults they have a good amount or a great deal of trust in the White House, while 61 percent say they trust the administration "not very much" or "not at all."

Congress fares even worse: Only 29 percent say they significantly trust the legislative branch, while 68 percent say they have little or no trust in their elected representatives.

The press – Trump's favorite punching bag – is viewed as less reliable than he is, with 30 percent of adults having significant trust in the media, compared with 68 percent who do not. Those results are deeply split along partisan lines: While a majority of Democrats – 56 percent – have a good amount or a great deal of trust in the media, only 9 percent of Republicans do. A whopping 59 percent of Republicans have no trust in the media at all.

Two other institutions that Trump has frequently attacked – the courts and the intelligence community – are much more trusted, according to the poll.

Popular opinion of the judiciary is fairly strong, with 60 percent of adults saying they have a good or great amount of trust in the courts, compared with 37 percent who don't have much or any. Americans also have significant trust in the intelligence community, with 60 percent of adults holding a good or great deal of trust for agencies such as the CIA and the FBI, while 37 percent view them skeptically.

The poll additionally showed Americans are less certain elections will be conducted fairly. While half say they have a good or great amount of trust in the election process, only 17 percent – a decrease of 5 points from March – have high confidence that elections are fair.

And while a majority Americans believe the right to vote is adequately protected, nearly half of Democrats – 44 percent – say voting rights are too restricted, while a quarter of Republicans think the right to vote has been expanded too far.

The poll also found partisan disagreement among central protections in the First Amendment, particularly with regard to freedom of the press and the right to criticize the government.

About a quarter of adults say both rights have been too far restricted. But in both cases, roughly 4 in 10 Republicans say the opposite is true, and that the rights have been too far expanded.

Most Americans – 53 percent – say there is enough protection of freedom of religion, while a third say religious freedom is too restricted.

