A 23-year-old gay man has spoken of how he was attacked, left beaten and bruised, and faced a barrage of homophobic abuse late on Monday morning

A 23-YEAR-OLD gay man has spoken of how he was attacked, left beaten and bruised, and faced a barrage of homophobic abuse early on Monday morning when he left a well-known gay club in Belfast city centre.

Dean McKenzie, from Kilmacormick in Enniskillen, lives in Belfast and left the Kremlin Nightclub on foot after what he described as a ‘usual’ night out.

Advertisement

But, within minutes he was jumped by two men who he said called him a ‘poof’, a ‘dirty queer’ and kicked and punched him in the face.

“I just came round the corner, a two minute walk from the club and two guys came out of nowhere,” Dean told the Fermanagh Herald.

“One of them asked ‘Did you have a good night you poof?’. At this stage I realised I was in danger, one of them struck out and punched me.

“And when I fell, the other one kicked me in the face, hence the nose bleed. They called me a ‘dirty queer’ and left me lying there.”

A police spokesman confirmed that an investigation is underway into the attack.

He said: “Police are investigating reports that a man was assaulted in the Royal Avenue area of Belfast sometime between 12.05am and 3am on Sunday (September 23). It is understood the male had left licensed premises when he was approached by two males who assaulted him. Enquiries are continuing.”

Dean, who recently appeared on the Stephen Nolan show to speak about the the gay marriage debate, also referred to support he had been given by friends and family.

Advertisement

“I am feeling a little shaken but completely overwhelmed by the huge support I have received from people in Fermanagh and Belfast, gay and straight.

“This attack only highlights that homophobia still very much exists and perhaps that something of which the DUP and other various political parties should be concerned with and not the fact whether gay people should be allowed to marry or adopt. However, I’m still determined to put my head up and be proud of who I am.”