New Source: Bhopal Samachar | Image Source: Mediadarbar Image is for representational purpose only

The shocking incident allegedly took place at village Mudwara under Nowgong police station of Chattarpur district on 24th August. A 45-year old Dalit woman had been granted a “patta”of a piece of government land a few months ago. The piece earlier belonged to Vijay Yadav. He was angered and started harassing her.

The victim alleged that on 24th August, Yadav had let his cattle in her field to damage the crops. When she went to his home to complain, Yadav’s wife Vimla beat her with lathis. After some time, Yadav joined them, stripped the victim and also forced her to drink his urine. Moreover, she was threatened that worse treatment would be meted out to her if she dared to register a complaint with the police.

The woman did go to the police and the Nowgong police registered case under IPC section 394, 323, 506 and 34 and relevant sections of SC/ST Act against the upper caster couple.

However, the Dalit woman, along with a group of Dalits went to meet Additional Superintendent of Police (ASP), Chhatarpur, Neeraj Pandey, and complained that the local police did not take any action against the accused couple. Superintendent of Police (SP), Chhatarpur, Lalit Shakyawar said that a case was registered against the couple in the local police station but the victim had not informed the police of the alleged incident. However, keeping the gravity of the matter in mind, he has instructed the sub-divisional officer of police to further probe the matter and take appropriate action against the accused couple. This piece of information was given to HT over phone. Meanwhile, since the complaint has been registered with the police, the couple has absconded from the village.

We believe that if the allegation proves to be true after further investigation , then tough action should be taken against the couple for meting out this inhuman treatment to a woman of a lower caste over land dispute.