Lake Worth resident Telise Maquaire says she was asleep early Sunday morning when a strange noise woke her up, but when she emerged from her bedroom she never expected to see a stranger standing in front of her Christmas tree.MOBILE/TABLET USERS: Watch the ReportPhoto: See suspect composite sketch According to Maquaire, she watched from behind the branches as large man with dreadlocks lunged at her husband, knocking him out.She screamed and that's when she says the attacker came after her."I was just screaming and he left my husband and came here and got me right here onto the floor," said Maquaire."All I could see was the color of his hand as he's beating me."Most read: Police search for fatal hit-and-run driver in Boynton BeachShe said the incident happened around 2 a.m. at her home on south K Street, and her 13-year-old daughter was also home at the time.According to Maquaire nothing was stolen, but she and her husband suffered multiple injuries.No arrest has been made, but Palm Beach County Sheriffs officials say they are investigating the incident as a burglary.Deputies released a description of the suspect as an unknown black male, 5’10” to 6’0” tall, 25 – 33 years of age, stocky build with shoulder length dreadlocks. He was wearing a dark colored shirt and dark pants.If anyone can identify this suspect they are urged to contact Crime Stoppers at 1-800-458-TIPS. LIST: Florida's most violent counties

Lake Worth resident Telise Maquaire says she was asleep early Sunday morning when a strange noise woke her up, but when she emerged from her bedroom she never expected to see a stranger standing in front of her Christmas tree.

MOBILE/TABLET USERS: Watch the Report

Photo: See suspect composite sketch

Advertisement Related Content Man arrested in connection with Lake Worth home invasion

According to Maquaire, she watched from behind the branches as large man with dreadlocks lunged at her husband, knocking him out.

She screamed and that's when she says the attacker came after her.

"I was just screaming and he left my husband and came here and got me right here onto the floor," said Maquaire.

"All I could see was the color of his hand as he's beating me."

Most read: Police search for fatal hit-and-run driver in Boynton Beach

She said the incident happened around 2 a.m. at her home on south K Street, and her 13-year-old daughter was also home at the time.

According to Maquaire nothing was stolen, but she and her husband suffered multiple injuries.

No arrest has been made, but Palm Beach County Sheriffs officials say they are investigating the incident as a burglary.

Deputies released a description of the suspect as an unknown black male, 5’10” to 6’0” tall, 25 – 33 years of age, stocky build with shoulder length dreadlocks. He was wearing a dark colored shirt and dark pants.

If anyone can identify this suspect they are urged to contact Crime Stoppers at 1-800-458-TIPS.

AlertMe