by

(A Fuss Free Cooking Recipe)

Generous portions to 2 men & an average serving size to a lady (me!)

Ingredients:

300g asian long life noodles

300g mince chicken marinates with 1 tbsp each for light & dark soy sauce, 1 tsp chilli flakes & some white pepper

1 large carrots, diced

1/3 cabbage, roughly diced

4 garlic cloves, grated (or chopped)

1 tbsp dark soy sauce

1 tbsp light soy sauce

1/2 tsp sesame oil

White pepper

Method:

1. Cook long life noodles according to packet instructions. Add some oil to the noodles after draining the water. This will prevent the noodles from sticking together.

2. In a large wok (or pan), heat 2 tbsps of vegetables and cook the chicken when the oil is hot. Be careful when adding chicken into the oil as the oil will splatter due to the marinate.

3. When the chicken is cooked, add garlic and carrot. Saute until the garlic becomes aromatic.

4. Add cabbage and cook until slightly tender.

5. Add noodles and seasonings. Toss to combine noodles and seasonings with the chicken-vegetables mixture. Serve immediately.

Note:

If you don’t have asian long life noodles (i.e the ones I’ve used), udon and soba (dried or fresh) or instant ramen noodles (minus the seasonings) could work as well. It’s the same with vegetables: you can replace them with any unused vegetables towards the end of the week, such as leftover spinach, chinese greens, celery, cauliflower, zucchini or frozen vegetables. Oh, it got me thinking: if you so happen to have some leftover chilli or curry paste, you can add that instead of soy sauce.

It does sound like a “whatever” recipe, doesn’t it?

In this recipe, the seasonings are pretty neutral and garlic is the main contributor of flavour in this recipe. Instead of chicken, frozen prawns is another option. If you don’t have any meat on hand, top the noodles with an omelette just before serving. If you are thinking of using long life noodles, just make sure you taste the noodles (in step 5) before adding any seasonings. Sometimes dried noodles can be quite salty on its own even after being cooked in water. You may need to vary the amount soy sauce specified in the recipe.

{Enjoy!}