AN Oxford student who knifed her lover in a drug and drink-fuelled frenzy may avoid jail — after a judge hinted she is too clever for prison.

Aspiring heart surgeon Lavinia Woodward, 24, stabbed Thomas Fairclough in the leg with a breadknife and hurled a laptop, glass and jam jar at him.

Facebook 11 Lavinia Woodward, 24, stabbed her boyfriend with a bread knife and threw objects at him in a drink- and drug-fuelled rage

Facebook 11 The Oxford student may be spared jail as it could interfere with her professional goals

But Judge Ian Pringle suggested he will waive the usual prison term when he sentences her in case it damages her career.

He said: "It seems to me that if this was a one-off, a complete one-off.

"To prevent this extraordinary able young lady from not following her long-held desire to enter the profession she wishes to, would be a sentence which would be too severe.

"What you did will never, I know, leave you but it was pretty awful, and normally it would attract a custodial sentence, whether it is immediate or suspended."

Facebook 11 The aspiring surgeon admitted to wounding at Oxford crown court

11 A judge described the incident as a 'one-off'

11 A pal said Livinia is so intelligent she 'might win a Nobel prize'

11 She has already published articles in medical journals

Woodward, who admitted a charge of unlawful wounding at Oxford Crown Court, flew to Barbados after the hearing.

She has published articles in medical journals and will be returning to Oxford’s historic Christ Church college in the next academic year.

A friend said: “They see her as someone worth the risk of having around. She might win a Nobel Prize, she is that intelligent.”

MOST READ IN NEWS Exclusive DARK PAST Homeless man doused in water by rail staff KILLED man who splashed him with paint MOMO NO-NO Momo Challenge in 'Peppa Pig and Fortnite vids' as YouTube and Instagram slammed MOMO SHOCK Creepy 'suicide character' Momo told lad, 8, to 'stab himself in neck' TREE OF TERROR Mum horrified to learn what the strange 'pods' were hanging from branches SUICIDE WARNING What is Momo and how can parents protect their children? say no no to momo Expert advice on how to keep children safe from online suicide game Momo

Facebook 11 Lavinia flew to Barbados after the hearing

Facebook 11 She will return to Christ Church college for the next academic year

Prosecutor Cathy Olliver said Woodward met her ex, a Cambridge PhD student, on Tinder.

She said on September 30, the night of the attack, they rowed and Woodward's behaviour behaviour "deteriorated".

When Fairclough threatened to contact Woodward’s mum on Skype she punched him in the face before picking up a bread knife and stabbing him in the leg.

Defending, James Sturman QC said his client's dreams of becoming a surgeon were "almost impossible" as her conviction would have to disclosed.

11 Judge Ian Pringle said it would 'too severe' a punishment to prevent her from becoming a surgeon

11 The court heard Lavinia has battled addiction and was abused by a previous partner

11 She will be sentenced on September 25

The court heard Woodward had a "very troubled life," battling addiction and suffering abuse by another ex.

Judge Pringle will sentence her on September 25 but she has been slapped with a restraining order and told to stay drug-free and not to re-offend.

Mark Brooks, of the ManKind Initiative which supports male domestic violence victims, said: “The judge’s comments are unacceptable. This is domestic abuse against a man and the sympathy should be for him.”

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368