UPDATE ON C.C.F. TRIAL

24/3/2011





Panagiotis Masouras returned to the trial today after being released a few days ago, having served 18months without being sentenced (the greek law states that if your on remand for 18months without being sentenced you are released).





Although the comrade so far has abstained from the procedure, he appeared today in the court and took a seat in the defendants stand. But he did not make clear if he will participate in the procedure, neither if he is “here” in the legal sense.





His lawyer did not appear but Panagiotis said he remains his lawyer he just could not come today. The trial continued with the testimonies of the defence witnesses. First the owners of the apartments that G.Nikolopoulos rented in Exarxia from september 2007 to january 2009. The owners spoke of a perfect tenant that completed all his responsibilities.





After that testified the mother of M.Giospas who is also H.Hadjimihelakis aunt. She lives on the 1st floor, above the house that was later called a “safe house”. Describing the people visiting her nephews house, she spoke of people who gathered to watch movies, play video games and have conversations without taking any precaution measures, with the windows always open and everything “out in the open”, as she said. She mentioned that she entered her nephews house many times and she never saw any, as she said, suspicious objects such as pots or wires.





Finally, describing the day the cops of the anti-terrorist force raided her house and the one below hers, she said it was the worst experience of her life.

“Men with masks and guns obliged me to remain under 'house arrest' for three days, while they searched both houses. They didn't allow me to come into contact with anyone outside, neither to communicate with my son who they arrested without a lawyer”.





The theatre continues next Thursday.









UPDATE ON ARIS SIRINIDIS TRIAL



The trial began around 9. 30 comrades were in the court room as well as 30 outside. The defence witnesses are 47. Last time 17 testified. Today two more. The second witness describes the shooter as a very tall guy, skinny with long hair and a ponytail and said clearly that it was not Aris Sirinidis. Another witness, a foreign national with no known address is not appearing in court and the defence of Aris insisted that his testimony is read in the room. In his testimony he describes a guy tall like a basketball player with long hair.





Worth mentioning is also that the court wanted to examine a cop-witness that has had pre-interrogative duties. Aris defence immediately produced a document-decision of the supreme court stating this is illegal. After an agreement of the judge and the prosecutor, the cop will testify as a person with special knowledge, (on the mask with the d.n.a.), and not as person with pre-interrogative duties.

The theatre will continue on April 11th





THE PASSION FOR FREEDOM IS STRONGER THAN THEIR PRISONS