Important Figures met Trump from Technology

Washington — Donald Trump selected American President has met with leading figures of the country's technology on Wednesday, after which it seems as if the rest of the way to keep hostile between them are not, in which several people during the campaign as critics have been harsh with them. Trump Tower in this meeting in bodies that are رکھیتی the knowledge on a global scale, Facebook chief operating officer of Amazon sandbrg, shirl اِی Oh Jeff Alan bazos and mask, and Chief agsecto officer tilsa motors are included.





During the meeting, Trump style and was msalhana. At the beginning of the meeting, Trump said that there are people in the room. "we want to continue a series of inventions ' ideal '. He said to them, ' we can do anything to promote the process ", will definitely '."

















Chief agsecto officers, "trump said that when you have felt the need to talk, you can call me direct you." During the meeting, apart from three big Trump selected Vice President Mike cooking pans were children. Before the election ' high-tech ' from many leaders were concerned about the Presidency of Trump because they had criticised China on trade agreements, statements, and given to the words of the immigrants were, on the industry requires the availability of workers was very limited risk being bahner





On Tuesday, more than 200 ' high-tech ' open letter to his employees, I promise that they trump any effort to give the registry data ' from the ' not part of tratat would be based on their religion, or that possibly will be sent out of the country. During the campaign, Trump ' Silicone Valley ' are from الجھتے. They called on voters ' privacy ' on the basis of the position on the issue of ' Apple ' boycott, and promise that they will be forced to appeal to your computer and the iPhone will be ready within our country ""





The scene made the issue of ' Facebook ' Chief Information Officer, grion agsecto mark skerbrg of اِی ' books, disagreed with bsos, the OSCE condemned Jeff:, saying that "the Washington Post reported on the scene made over to the leadership of taxpayers so that they can sebch. In his editorials, ' the Washington Post ' Trump little on has been so kind.





However, Trump has promised to well-known figures of tankalwaji that will be restored, "the appropriate trade agreements, with the help of which you will be easy for you to be able to easily cross-border trade" ".