Next Game: Oklahoma State 4/21/2017 | 6:30 p.m. FSSW+

The No. 4 Texas Tech baseball team tacked on four runs in the fifth inning to take a 6-4 win over New Mexico State on Tuesday night at Security Bank Ballpark.With the victory, the Red Raiders (32-8) completed the season series sweep of the Aggies (23-15), picking up a 16-1 win in Lubbock on Feb. 21, followed by a 15-4 win in Las Cruces on April 4. It was the first time in the series Tech had not scored more than 10 runs or had more than 10 hits.The Red Raiders tallied seven hits, coming from six different hitters. Junior infielderhad a two-hit night, including an RBI and a run scored. Senior outfielder& junioreach recorded triples against the Aggies.Freshman right-handerpicked up his first start of his collegiate career on Tuesday night. The Maud native went 1.0 inning, giving up just one hit, while inducing a double play to end the frame. Tech used a total of seven pitchers against the Aggies, as junior leftyimproved to 5-1 after 2.0 frames, striking out five.The Red Raiders struck first in the bottom of the second, thanks to a two-out triple from Gardner off the right field wall, scoring, who walked earlier in the frame. With Gardner on third,hit a chopper to the right of the pitcher, who sent a throw off target to first base, allowingto reach & Gardner to score to make it 2-0.After a scoreless third, the Aggies took the lead in the top of the fourth with three runs, all with two outs, to go ahead 3-2. With the bases loaded, a strikeout to Fishback put two away, but a wild pitch on strike three allowed one run to score and the others to move up to second & third. Then, a single up the middle from Still cleared the bases to complete the three run frame.The Aggies added another in the fifth on an error after a diving play from Davis, extending the New Mexico State lead to 4-2.Tech took back the lead in the bottom half of the inning, plating four to go up, 6-4. Gardner began the frame by reaching base on an error, then moved to second with the ball skipped away and into the grass. With one gone, Long smashed a triple off the wall in right-center field, easily scoring Gardner for the first run of the frame.& Davis followed with a single & a double, respectively, to make it three-straight Red Raider hits. Jung sent a single into right field to tie it, while Davis countered with a double down the left field line to drive in Jung from first to make it 5-4. McMillon brought in another behind a bases-loaded infield single for the fourth run of the frame.It was the 22time this season the Red Raiders have scored four or more runs in a single inning.McMillon would enter in the ninth and close out on the season series, earning his fifth save of the year.The Red Raiders return to Lubbock for their second home conference series of the year, taking on Oklahoma State on April 21-23 at Dan Law Field at Rip Griffin Park.