A Canadian senior citizen is making waves - and gaining tons of fans - as an unlikely grindcore star, thanks to her impressively-ferocious vocals which she showcases as a back-up singer for her son’s band.

The 67-year-old sensation, who has been dubbed 'The Grindmother', first began doing back-up vocals for the band, Corrupt Leaders, last year, and has now released her first single, At Any Cost, for the group, which is fronted by her son, who goes by the name Rain Forest.

In the video, she's seen head-banging and screaming into the microphone as she belts out the song's politically-inspired lyrics.

Introducing The Grindmother: A 67-year-old mom from Canada has joined her son's grindcore band, Corrupt Leaders, and just released her first single, 'At Any Cost'

The Grindmother has even caught the attention of Ozzy Osbourne, who recently tweeted out a link to her video, writing: 'What the f**k?'

Last year, when the ultra-cool mom first started performing with the band, a video was posted which showed her screaming into a microphone, and laughing as her son instructed her on how to do back-up vocals.

'So, before it fades out, you do what?' she adorably asks her son in the clip, before promising to 'try not to make it sound like I’m having a s**t'.

The amusing video received more than 260,000 views, and prompted her son to set up a website and Facebook page for his mom under her stage name, The Grindmother.

His band is also selling T-shirts with her picture and the words: 'Listen to Grindmother'.

Sing it! The Grindmother first began doing back-up vocals for the band last year, and now she has her own single, which she wrote herself

Family: Her son, Rain Forest (left), taught her how to sing for the band in an amusing YouTube video last year

She's into it: Grindcore, which originated in the 1980s, is inspired by heavy metal, death metal, and punk rock, and features distorted guitar sounds, overdriven bass, and screaming vocals

YouTube commenters got a kick out of her video for At Any Cost, a political song that she wrote about Canada's recently ousted conservative Prime Minister, Stephen Harper.

In the clip, she's seen angrily belting out the lyrics: '10 years of your leadership to benefit the rich, every trick in book, breach your privilege, do as corporate masters say.'

'Jeez, my grandma bakes me cookies and then naps,' said one envious YouTube user, while another wrote: 'You are living proof that one is NEVER to old to rock and enjoy it, even in grindcore! And I'm sure your son will cherish these memories with you forever.'

Grindcore, which originated in the 1980s, is inspired by heavy metal, death metal, and punk rock, and features distorted guitar sounds, overdriven bass, and screaming vocals.

Her posse: The Grindmother is gaining lots of publicity for her son's band, Corrupt Leaders

Going solo? She recently debuted an MP3 of her song for fans to download, announcing the news on her Facebook page and signing her post: 'Love, Grindmother'

Like Corrupt Leaders, many grindcore bands sing about social and political issues.

The Grindmother recently debuted an MP3 of her song for fans to download, writing on her Facebook page: 'My son made a page where you can download it for free or a donation. The sound on this one varies a bit from the video. Hope you like it! Love, Grindmother.'

In another post, she joked about all the attention she's been getting from the song, sharing: 'This past week has been a whirlwind!