Publisher The Oz Film Manufacturing Co

L Frank Baum's film of his fairy tale "The Patchwork Girl of Oz"



Violet MacMillan...Ojo, a Munchkin Boy

Frank Moore...Unc Nunkie, Ojo's Guardian

Raymond Russell...Dr. Pipt, the Crooked Magician

Leontine Dranet...Margolotte, his wife, who makes the Patchwork Girl

Bobbie Gould...Jesseva, his daughter, betrothed to Danx

Marie Wayne...Jinjur, a Maid in the Emerald City

Richard Rosson...Danx, a Noble Munchkin (as Dick Rosson)

Frank Bristol...The Soldier with the Green Whiskers (Omby Amby)

Fred Woodward...The Woozy, a Quaintness / The Zoop, A Mystery / Mewel, who is Everybody's Friend

Todd Wright...The Wizard of Oz

Bert Glennon...The Scarecrow (as Herbert Glennon)

Hal Roach...The Cowardly Lion / Tottenhot (as Al Roach)

Andy Anderson...The Hungry Tiger

Jessie May Walsh...Ozma of Oz, the Ruler of the Emerald City

William Cook...The Royal Chamberlain



Produced by

L Frank Baum



Directed by

J Farrell MacDonald

Contact Information http://video-cellar.blogspot.com/

plus-circle Add Review

comment Reviews

Reviewer: CorporalPig22 - favorite favorite favorite favorite favorite - May 15, 2018

Subject: ВИD Has An Older Sister It's the infamous Oz Film Company logo.... It will haunt you in your dreams (erm, nightmares).... and it was summoned by a Satanic cult from the time, who, 76 years later, would summon her younger brother, ВИD.



Ah, but at the end, it gets worse.... The close-up variant of the logo is pure nighmare fuel. For the "in-your-face" style of the logo is bound to scare many unsuspecting viewers that expected the normal variant.... not to mention that it is usually silent.



RUN FOR YOUR HECKING LIVES.... - May 15, 2018ВИD Has An Older Sister

Reviewer: I_h8_screen_names - favorite favorite favorite favorite - June 5, 2014

Subject: The Patchwork Girl This is a cute movie. There was no music at all on it when I watched. - June 5, 2014The Patchwork Girl

Reviewer: judeblack, bbc - favorite favorite favorite favorite - June 1, 2014

Subject: A Ripping Good Time! The actor playing the Patchwork Girl is Pierre Couderc or The Marvelous Couderc. Wikipedia says he was a French acrobat, actor, screenwriter and producer and that he also appeared in His Majesty The Scarecrow of Oz.



Mr. Couderc certainly deserves credit because he does a great job of bringing Scraps to life. In the books, she is never still, always getting into trouble, but truly kind and helpful. She's all that in this movie too.



The Woozy is also very well done; he looks exactly like John R. Neill's illustrations.



Thank you for posting this movie. It is a gem. - June 1, 2014A Ripping Good Time!

Reviewer: Dr M - - June 16, 2010

Subject: Greatful, but... I'm really greatful to the poster for allowing us to see this film. I've wanted to see it for a long time, so it was a thrill to finally be able to enjoy it. However, as noted, the picture quality leaves a lot to be desired. If anyone can post this wonderful movie again in a more watchable form, I'm sure there would be a lot of greatful people out there, me included. - June 16, 2010Greatful, but...

Reviewer: FP - favorite - December 17, 2008

Subject: Awful video compression artifacts Whatever entertainment to be had from the film is demolished by the hugely artifacted video compression. The size of the file is no indicator of the quality in this instance. It looks horrible. I downloaded the .ogv.



Concerning the previous reviewer's comments about the music: I agree it's inappropriate. It consists of haphazardly-chosen NUTCRACKER excerpts for the most part, if memory serves. However, I don't think it's a synthesized orchestra. The audio compression is also bad, so that the squashing of the sound makes it flange/phase horribly, giving it an electronic edge. - December 17, 2008Awful video compression artifacts