Jamie Waylett, 22, who plays Hogwarts bully Vincent Crabbe in the hit film series, downed the bubbly after it was looted from a ransacked Sainsbury's store moments earlier, it was said.

Waylett was caught on camera during the third day of last summer's civil disorder as violence erupted in Chalk Farm, north London, on August 8, Wood Green Crown Court heard.

He was first spotted dashing across Chalk Farm Road at 10.45pm after a gang smashed in the front windows of a Sainsbury's supermarket, said prosecutor Rebekah Hummerstone.

'Moments later, he accepted a bottle of sparkling wine from a friend who is also seen on the footage carrying a number of bottles,' she added.

Around 90 minutes later, Waylett was again spotted on the CCTV with his hood up and could be seen trying to cover the lower part of his face with a scarf, the court heard.

His companions also had masked faces.

'He was picked up by CCTV two minutes later. He and other members of his group were carrying petrol bombs,' said Ms Hummerstone.

Waylett, who is believed to be good friends with fellow Harry Potter stars Daniel Radcliffe and Rupert Grint, was arrested after a 'painstaking' review of Camden Council CCTV footage.

In interview he told police he was 'fascinated' by the disorder, but denied taking part in violence.

'He agreed he had been handed a bottle of champagne to drink out of and at one point covered his face after spotting acquaintances,' said Ms Hummerstone.

'He also agreed he had been carrying a petrol bomb and said he was asked by other people to carry it. He had some trouble with them in the past and felt obliged to comply.'

But he insisted that he had no intention of using the petrol bomb and had thrown it in a nearby rubbish bin, she added.

'The prosecution say he appears to have travelled to Camden from his home to join in and play his part in the civil disorder,' Ms Hummerstone said.

'His handling of the petrol bomb is sufficient of his intention that evening.'

Dressed in dark suit and light blue shirt, and sporting a shaven head and goatee beard, Waylett, spoke only to confirm his name, age and address during the hearing.

He appeared in six Harry Potter films before his character was written out in the final Deathly Hallows instalment.

Waylett, of West Hampstead, north west London, denies having an article with intent to destroy or damage property - an offence under the Criminal Damage Act - and violent disorder.