Between the Covers — Get Ready to Ignite! Ohio Wesleyan University senior Chase Smith guest hosts tonight's show as he and Tracy Lawson talk about Tracy's new release, Ignite: Book Three of the Resistance Series.﻿ Read Tracy's books here.

Book Launch Party: Resist by Tracy Lawson Join author Tracy Lawson as we celebrate the release of her new dystopian sci-fi novel, Resist! Knowledge comes with a price. Tommy and Careen no longer believe the Office of Civilian Safety and Defense's miracle antidote can protect them from a terrorist's chemical weapons. After accidentally discovering the antidote's real purpose, they join the fight to undermine the OCSD's bid for total control of the population. Resist is the sequel to Counteract, which we celebrated on LIVE last year.

Jeffrey Tucker – Liberty Classics: The Art of Being Free THE Jeffrey Tucker returns to a screen near you for another installment of Liberty Classics! The classic of the week is The Art of Being Free by Wendy McElroy. This is a book on the current state of freedom, by one of the great thinkers and essayists of our time: Wendy McElroy. But it is unlike any you have ever read. It deals with the current crisis in a way that no one else does. It has deep and fascinating research on all the main issues we face: the loss of security in the name of security, the state’s role in strangling economic opportunity, the petty central planning that has regimented every aspect of life, the loss of basic civil liberties.

The Broken Throne Come join us for a celebration of Tom Liberman's book, The Broken Throne! This event is open to the public. Nonmembers can sign up here. Is it better to rule in Tyranny or live in Freedom? The great capital of the Empire fell a thousand years ago and all that is left is a broken city filled with monstrous creatures guarding an ancient symbol of power, The Broken Throne. The people of Stav’rol believe they are destined to retrieve the throne and rebuild the Empire. They believe the human race is superior but have thus far failed in every attempt to pierce the guardians of Das’von. Now a great Sea Giant is sailing north hoping to use the throne and the legitimacy it gives him, to rebuild the Old Empire in his name. The Guide of Stav’rol cannot allow this to happen and sends one of the finest young warriors in the nation to infiltrate the crew of the unstoppable warship and sail with them to Das’von. Once there Dietrich is to betray the Sea Giant and turn the throne over to the Guide. Things are not always as simple as they sound and a taste of freedom can turn a man against everything he has ever known, or can it?

Drinking Game/Book Launch: Infinite Ending by Frank Marcopolos If you've ever been to a Liberty.me LIVE event, you might remember Frank Marcopolos. He's been to more LIVE events than anybody else, and more often than not he's the life of the party. And now Frank is having his own damn event. We're having a book launch party to celebrate Frank's new collection of funny, witty, sexy, creepy new stories — Infinite Ending. The get-together will be a lowbrow drinking game/highfalutin gab session/wild cyberspace bacchanal of libations and liberty. It's going to be a party. It's going to be fun. And you're going to like it. Any questions? Dress code not enforced, but fine hats recommended. BYOB. *** Join Frank and talk fiction, fun, and (of course) drinks with him and host Mike Reid on Thursday, December 11th at 8pm EST. Looking for more of Frank? Check out his website!

David Friedman LIVE: Harald & Salamander Lovers of liberty know David Friedman as an incredible economist and legal theorist, especially as author of the anarcho-capitalist masterpiece The Machinery of Freedom. What many don't know is that Friedman is also a novelist, with two fantastic works of fiction under his belt (and hopefully more to come). His first novel, Harald, was released in 2006 (audiobook, Amazon), and the second, Salamander, in 2011 (Amazon). Both books, while intriguing on their own as works of fiction, also bear the clear markings of products of Friedman's careful genius, with precisely thought-out social systems that exhibit many themes libertarians will certainly find interesting. Join David Friedman on Liberty.me LIVE Tuesday, December 9th at 9pm EST as he discusses his fiction, his writing process, and his views on liberty in fantasy and reality!

Sci-Fi Economics, Session #4 with Lucas Engelhardt Science Fiction has long been a favorite genre for liberty-lovers. But can it teach Economics? Enter "Sci-Fi Economics," a four-part original course from Liberty.me LIVE. Instead of assigned (suggested) readings, we'll have "assigned watchings" from your favorite sci-fi TV shows. Professor Lucas Engelhardt, himself a connoisseur of science fiction, will be your guide. This week, Professor Engelhardt will cover Sliders Season 3, Episode 12, "Seasons Greedings." What happens when science fiction just gets economic reality all wrong? We'll discuss the tropes of consumerism and uncaring capitalism, as well as the little things even bad sci-fi writers manage to get right Monday, November 3rd at 9pm ET!

Sci-Fi Economics, Session #2 with Lucas Engelhardt Science Fiction has long been a favorite genre for liberty-lovers. But can it teach Economics? Enter "Sci-Fi Economics," a four-part original course from Liberty.me LIVE. Instead of assigned (suggested) readings, we'll have "assigned watchings" from your favorite sci-fi TV shows. Professor Lucas Engelhardt, himself a connoisseur of science fiction, will be your guide. This week will focus on with "Black Market," Season 2 Episode 14 of Battlestar Galactica, available free in standard definition on YouTube, and for digital purchase from Amazon Instant Video, Apple TV, and Vudu. Prof. Engelhardt will use this episode to discuss the follies of rationing programs, and will show why free markets are much more effective at allocating resources. What creates black markets? Are they a negative influence, or an expression of freedom under oppression? Join Lucas Engelhardt for some fun applying lessons from fiction to real-world facts Monday, October 20th at 9pm EDT, only on Liberty.me LIVE!

Liberty Classics: The Art of Being Free by Wendy McElroy Can we live full, free, and prosperous lives in these times, starting now? McElroy says that we can and we must. She presents a new way of thinking about how to build civilization even when it is so under attack. In her view, the worst mistake we can make is to allow our lives to be consumed by politics and the awful realities that surround us. We must instead surround ourselves by people and things we truly love. The best way to fight back, she says, is to find and build freedom for ourselves. We must discover the art of being free. Join Jeffrey Tucker for a discussion of this book Sunday, November 2nd at 8pm ET and learn how you too can live a freer life!

Author's Forum: Counteract by Tracy Lawson The Office of Civilian Safety and Defense has guarded the public against the rampant threat of terrorism for the last fifteen years with the full backing of the US government. Their carefully crafted list of Civilian Restrictions means no concerts or sporting events, no travel, no social media, no cash transactions, and no driver's licenses for eighteen-year-olds Tommy and Careen. The OCSD has even outlawed grocery stores, all in the name of safety. Now, there's a new threat-airborne chemical weapons that could be activated at any time. But the OCSD has an antidote: Just three drops a day is all it takes to stay safe. It's a small price to pay for safety. Or is it... Join author Tracy Lawson as we celebrate the release of Counteract Wednesday, October 8th at 9pm ET!

Sci-Fi Economics with Lucas Engelhardt Science Fiction has long been a favorite genre for liberty-lovers. But can it teach Economics? Enter "Sci-Fi Economics," a four-part original course from Liberty.me LIVE. Instead of assigned (suggested) readings, we'll have "assigned watchings" from your favorite sci-fi TV shows. Professor Lucas Engelhardt, himself a connoisseur of science fiction, will be your guide. This week will begin with "Treachery, Faith, and the Great River," Season 7 Episode 6 of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, available free from CBS.com, by subscription through Hulu, Amazon Prime Instant Video, and Netflix, and for digital purchase from Apple TV and Vudu. Prof. Engelhart will use this episode to discuss the role of money and discuss the relationship between praxeology and fiction Monday, October 13th at 9pm EDT, only on Liberty.me LIVE! Update: Thanks to an epic glitch with the recording, we'll be reprising session #1 October 13th, so if you missed it, head on over!

Author's Forum: House of Refuge by Mike DiBaggio Justin Agnarsson is stationkeeper and lone crewman of South Atlantic House of Refuge #49, a floating sanctuary for the thousands of mariners and seasteading families who live and work in the 350-mile long Plata Raft. Now, war threatens to bring an end to his lifesaving mission as an Argentine warship pursues a pair of refugees to the station. A house of refuge is supposed to be inviolable, but the Argentines are hell bent on their mission. Alone and virtually defenseless, Agnarsson faces an impossible choice between duty and survival. But when the brutality of war threatens to unravel the fabric of civilization, more than lives are at stake. Join Mike DiBaggio and his wife, Shell (the illustrator), for a discussion of House of Refuge Wednesday, September 24th at 9pm EDT only on Liberty.me LIVE!