Suicide Squad explodes to $65 million on Friday

Suicide Squad brought in an estimated $65 million at the domestic box office on Friday, with an average of $15,306 per theater. That number includes the $20.5 million in Thursday previews. The Warner Bros. release received a B+ CinemaScore from audiences, ahead of Batman v Superman‘s B score.

The film also continues to dominate the international marketplace, opening in 17 additional territories yesterday with an estimated $33 million from 17,900 screens in 57 markets, bringing its international total to $64.6 million. Specific opening numbers from international territories include:

UK – $6.2 million

Mexico – $3.9 million

Spain – $1.4 million

Russia – $2.6 million

Brazil – $2 million

Australia – $2.3 million

Korea – $1.8 million

France – $1.2m

The comic book adaptation stars Will Smith (Ali, The Pursuit of Happyness), Margot Robbie (The Wolf of Wall Street, Focus), Joel Kinnaman (Netflix’s “House of Cards”), Viola Davis (The Help, Doubt), Jai Courtney (Insurgent), Jay Hernandez (Takers), Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje (Thor: The Dark World), Ike Barinholtz (Neighbors), Scott Eastwood (Fury), Cara Delevingne (Paper Towns), Adam Beach (Cowboys & Aliens), and Karen Fukuhara in her feature film debut.

You can read our two Suicide Squad reviews by clicking here and here.

It feels good to be bad… Assemble a team of the world’s most dangerous, incarcerated Super Villains, provide them with the most powerful arsenal at the government’s disposal, and send them off on a mission to defeat an enigmatic, insuperable entity. U.S. intelligence officer Amanda Waller has determined only a secretly convened group of disparate, despicable individuals with next to nothing to lose will do. However, once they realize they weren’t picked to succeed but chosen for their patent culpability when they inevitably fail, will the Suicide Squad resolve to die trying, or decide it’s every man for himself?

Written and directed by David Ayer and based on the characters from DC Comics, the film was produced by Charles Roven and Richard Suckle, with Zack Snyder, Deborah Snyder, Colin Wilson and Geoff Johns serving as executive producers.

[Gallery not found]