Ukraine Accused Of Trying To Storm Crimea

Ukraine Accused Of Trying To Storm Crimea

A rally, earlier this year, marking the second anniversary of Crimea voting to leave Ukraine and join Russia

Russia has accused Ukraine of attempting to storm into Crimea, the territory seized and annexed by Moscow in 2014.

Russian officials said one of its spies and a soldier were killed in separate assaults near to the border between Crimea and Ukraine.

President Vladimir Putin said Ukraine was playing a "dangerous game" and had chosen "terror over peace".

He said extra security measures would be put in place.

Image: Vladimir Putin says Ukraine is playing a 'dangerous game'

But Ukraine responded saying that Russia was only interested in causing "more war".

Ukraine is accused by Moscow of trying to destabilise Crimea in the run-up to elections in the territory and Russia in September.

Russia seized the Black Sea region from Ukraine in March 2014 and at least 9,000 people have died in the conflict that followed.

:: How Will Theresa May Tackle The Challenge Of Russia?

The FSB, the Russian spy agency, said that its officer was killed on Saturday near Armyansk by the border between Crimea and Ukraine.

The FSB said its officers engaged with "Ukrainian saboteurs" and 20 bombs, ammunition and mines were found.

Russian Army Could Out-Gun British Troops

The agency said two more groups of saboteurs tried to force their way into Crimea late on Sunday, backed by Ukrainian artillery.

The FSB said one Russian soldier died in the incoming fire. Russia described the incidents as "foiled terrorist attacks".

It accused Ukrainian military intelligence of plotting to target crucial parts of Crimea's infrastructure ahead of the elections.

:: Revealed: Russia's 'Secret Syria Mercenaries'

Ukrainian Security Service chief Yuri Tandit denied the FSB's report, insisting Kiev had no intention of taking back the territory "by force".

Kiev is preparing to celebrate the 25th anniversary of Ukrainian independence on 24 August.

Ukrainian officials suggest Moscow may try to disrupt the celebrations.

They said Russian forces in Crimea were building up near the border with Ukraine.

This "could mean Moscow's preparing for offensive operations", the officials added.