Hello everyone!

This past fall we rolled out a long-awaited update to Minecraft: Windows 10 Edition Beta & Minecraft: Pocket Edition – basic redstone components. Today we’re excited to let you know that we’ll be adding even more of the gameplay elements you’ve been eagerly awaiting to both of these editions with the Overworld Update coming by the end of this month. Yay!

Here’s what we’re adding in the Overworld Update:

Finally make more advanced mechanical contraptions for your world with additional redstone components. Comparators, repeaters, dispensers, droppers, hoppers, trapped chests and various additional Minecart types will all be available. Invent all the things!

Tangle with spooky witches and their huts during your adventures. Witch huts found while exploring swamps also now contain an exciting new feature – their cauldrons will be filled with a randomly generated potion that you can snag for your own if you’re feeling sticky-fingered.

Speaking of cauldrons, they can now be used to dye your armor an array of beautiful colors.

Display your coolest loot in your home with Item Frames – or mount your maps on the wall to plan your adventures with a world overview.

Other gameplay elements new to Pocket Edition and Windows 10 Beta are slime blocks, wearable pumpkins, red sandstone as well as improved chicken jockey mobs.

Even beyond gameplay elements, we’re also now introducing the ability to import and export maps into the Windows 10 Edition Beta, making it easier for you to share your favorite worlds with friends.

And for those of you who love racking up Gamerscore, there are eight new achievements on the Windows 10 Edition Beta totaling 170 additional Xbox Gamerscore that you can get:

Camouflage – Kill a mob while wearing the same type of mob head.

Dispense With This – Construct a dispenser.

Tie Dye Outfit – Dye all 4 unique pieces of leather armor.

Map Room – Place 9 fully explored, adjacent maps into 9 item frames in a 3 by 3 square.

Trampoline Bounce – 30 blocks upward off of a slime block.

Freight Station – Use a Hopper to move an item from a Chest Minecart to a Chest.

Smelt Everything! – Connect 3 Chests to a single Furnace using 3 Hoppers.

Taste of Your Own Medicine – Poison a witch with a splash potion.

Last year we brought you dozens of new features to Pocket Edition and the Windows 10 Edition Beta, and we’re excited to continue bringing you awesome new content right through 2016 as well!

And, if you’d like to get started playing on these Minecraft editions in the meantime, you can check out the Windows 10 Edition Beta over at the Windows Store, and the Pocket Edition on the iOS App Store, Google Play, Amazon and the Windows Store.

Happy mining, kind crafters!