About Dogs – Caucasian Shepherd Dogs Posted by Bassa's Blog on 07/07/2012 · 56 Comments

Background: The mountainous region of the Caucasus which lies between the Black Sea and Caspian Sea is home to one of the oldest living Molosser breeds, the Caucasian Shepherd or Mountain Dog (Georgian: კავკასიური ნაგაზი). There is a great variety of types among Caucasian dogs depending on their home region. The original purpose of this breed was to protect livestock from bears, wolves and thieves. Dogs similar to this superb guardian have protected livestock for at least 600 years. Even though its original use as a livestock guardian is declining it is still used by shepherds in Georgia and throughout the Caucasus Region.

The dogs are very highly regarded in Georgia. The image of the head of a Caucasian Shepherd dog decorated the coats of arms of several Georgian grand dukes.

Description: The breed is characterized by a massive bone structure and strong musculature. The tail is high set and usually carried in the shape of sickle, hook or ring. The thick coat is especially effective at keeping out the cold. There are two coat varieties: short and long. On the long-haired type, the hairs on the neck form a lion-like “mane”, and fringes and culottes on the rear part of the legs. The tail is thick and bushy. The short-haired type lacks these characteristics. Colors vary from gray, fawn, tan, pied, brindle and white. The large paws have hair between the toes, providing excellent insulation. Weight is in the range of 99-154 pounds (45-70 kg). The desirable height for males is in the range of 72 – 75 cm, for females 66 – 69 cm.

Characteristics: The typical Caucasian Shepherd dog is independent, strong willed and fearless. Because its thick coat protects it from adverse weather, it can live out-doors provided it has shelter. Despite its superb qualities this is not a dog for everyone. It does not accept people it does not know and has a powerful urge to defend its family and family pets. Unless it is properly socialized and trained it may exhibit ferocious and unmanageable tendencies.

An Example of a Working Dog Protecting Sheep

Caucasian Shepherd Puppies are adorable!

Georgia About has a long-haired female Caucasian Shepherd dog called Bassa.

She was born in October 2010 at the famous nursery at St. George’s Monastery of Tabakini, here in Georgia, where Orthodox priests have been breeding Caucasian Shepherd dogs since 1992.

Caucasian Shepherd Puppies Bred at the Tabakini Monastery

Bassa’s father’s name is Butkuna Tabakini. He is an international champion and won ‘Best in Show’ at the International Dog-show “Golden Gate 2010”, which took place in Kiev, Ukraine.

Bassa gave birth to a litter of 6 healthy puppies on 8 October 2013.

Click here to see more pictures of Bassa’s puppies.

We have written an eBook about life with our Caucasian Shepherd dog Bassa.

Called ‘Bassa’s World’, the book is a collection of anecdotes, photos and information about the life of a Caucasian Shepherd dog living in Tbilisi in Georgia.

CLICK on the picture for more information.

Advertisements