This is a tremendous song with exceptional singing by Bob Dylan, one of the lost masterpieces that will finally come out with good (better) sound! It sounds as if it was intended as a parody, of sorts, but turns into something all together different. This is great gospel music. Clinton Heylin wrote in the Telegraph, “…this seven-minute testifying spiritual seems to be largely improvised, and wholly inspired.”

Sign on the Cross is actually one of Bob Dylan’s very best performances. This seven minute gospel gem is perfect, from Garth Hudson’s swirling church organ down to Bob’s inspired (and probably) drunken preachings. I have listened to the song over and over, and marvelled at the thought of this song not getting an official release! That is, until now. I am eagerly awaiting my box-set and hoping for a miracle sound wise, like we got on the last Bootleg release (vol.10)

Bob Dylan – Sign on the cross:



“This one sounds pretty straightforward at first, as Dylan leads the Band through some timeworn gospel changes. Robbie Robertson ekes out gorgeous guitar lines worthy of Curtis Mayfield and Garth Hudson’s organ swells at all the right moments, coaxing a truly remarkable vocal from their leader. Things take a turn for the weird, however, around 4:25, when Dylan slips into an off-the-cuff spoken monologue, coming off as a country-fried preacher who may have been dipping into his moonshine supply. What began as pure holiness starts sounding just a little bit creepy. “ – pitchfork

Sign on the cross:

Now, I try, oh for so awf’ly long

And I just try to be

And now, oh it’s a gold mine

But it’s so fine

Yes, but I know in my head

That we’re all so misled

And it’s that ol’ sign on the cross

That worries me

Now, when I was just a bawlin’ child

I saw what I wanted to be

And it’s all for the sake

Of that picture I should see

But I was lost on the moon

As I heard that front door slam

And that old sign on the cross

Still worries me

Well, it’s that old sign on the cross

Well, it’s that old key to the kingdom

Well, it’s that old sign on the cross

Like you used to be

But, when I hold my head so high

As I see my ol’ friends go by

And it’s still that sign on the cross

That worries me

Well, it seem to be the sign on the cross. Ev’ry day,

ev’ry night, see the sign on the cross just layin’ up

on top of the hill. Yes, we thought it might have

disappeared long ago, but I’m here to tell you, friends,

that I’m afraid it’s lyin’ there still. Yes, just a

little time is all you need, you might say, but I don’t

know ’bout that any more, because the bird is here and

you might want to enter it, but, of course, the door might

be closed. But I just would like to tell you one time,

if I don’t see you again, that the thing is, that the sign

on the cross is the thing you might need the most.

Yes, the sign on the cross

Is just a sign on the cross

Well, there is some on every chisel

And there is some in the championship, too

Oh, when your, when your days are numbered

And your nights are long

You might think you’re weak

But I mean to say you’re strong

Yes you are, if that sign on the cross

If it begins to worry you

Well, that’s all right because sing a song

And all your troubles will pass right on through

– Hallgeir

Please share: Facebook

Twitter

Pinterest

More

Print

Email



LinkedIn

Pocket



Reddit

Tumblr



