Channeler The Concept The main idea of a channeler is to be a character with lots of vercitility. All of its abilities push this idea, with the main two mechanics, Point Based Spellcasting and Token Manifestations being the best examples. Point based spellcasting gives the user more vercitility when casting a spell, since they can more easily risk using a spell when others cant. That said, the Channeler, similar to the Warlock, can't cast as much as most spellcasters, due to having a lower then suggested amount of points Token Manifestations work like Eldritch Invocations, but they can be changed during rests, giving them more versatility and ability to change based on the situation. To counter this ofcourse, they are generally weaker, and you get less of them in total. Where a Warlock is about having choices in level up, a Channeler is about having choices in game to game play Similarly, you could call them too the (UnearthedArcana) Psion as the Warlock is too the Wizard. The Lore I don't really want to finalize the Lore untill I also have the final 10 levels, since the Prime version of the Channeler is an important part of what defines them. That said, Channelers work similarly to warlocks, getting their powers from a source, rather then arcane or devine magic. However, instead of their source being a patron, the channeler gets their powers from concepts and powerful existencial ideas that the Channeler gains authority over. In this document, I have created 4 Channeler Authorities that go up to Level 10. These include: Humanity, gaining power from the whims of the people, gets features and tokens that can help with RP and Proficiancies Spirits, gaining power from the spirits of the dead, gains features and tokens that can help with being stealthy, and assasinating specific targets Pain, gaining power from the pain of others whether emotional or physical, features and tokens based around becoming better fighters Realms, gaining power from the non-material realms, features and tokens based around becoming a better spellcaster. Playtesting I lack the ability or resources to playtest this properly, so if you can, talk to your DM about using this class, and contact me at continuityOfficer@gmail.com, /u/continuityOfficer, or at continuityOfficer.tumblr.com to tell me how it went, if you felt you where under or over powered, if you had any problems with the rules, and if you where having fun playing. Credits Homebrewery: http://homebrewery.naturalcrit.com/ Art from Page 2: http://teaink.deviantart.com/art/Grond-607486755 Art from Page 3: http://kimsokol.deviantart.com/art/Healing-Light-476575429 Past Level 10 I want past level 10 to continue the vercitility theme. Aswell as obviously giving you more tokens and casting points, I want the abilities to add to this aswell. There will only be 1 more authority feature, at Level 14, and 2 more authority tokens at the first level of each game tier. The Level 20 ability I want to be something that allows you to change out a single Token on the fly. Either by using Casting Points and as an action, or as allowing it a limited amount of times between short rests and having it take a minute. I'm unsure about how to balance 6+ level spells, since no matter what, theres a problem if they can cast even 3 level 9 spells in a day, and potencially more with the Realms Authority. Balancing I have tried to make this as balanced and as fun as possible, to try and incentive types of play, and make the character feel useful but not overpowering. That said, its easy to miss things, so please contact me by the same way you can as a playtester if you notice anything obvious.

Channeler The Channeler Level Proficiency Bonus Features Casting Points Max Spell Level Known Tokens 1st +2 Source Magic, Channelers Authority 2 1st - 2nd +2 Token Manifestation, Authority Token 4 1st 2 3rd +2 Innate Meditation 6 2nd 3 4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 8 2nd 4 5th +3 - 10 3rd 5 6th +3 Authority Token 12 3rd 5 7th +3 Authority Feature 14 4th 6 8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 16 4th 7 9th +4 - 18 5th 8 10th +4 Authority Feature 20 5th 9 Class Features As a channeler, you gain the following class features Hit Points Hit Dice: 1d8 per channeler level

1d8 per channeler level Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constituion modifier

8 + your Constituion modifier Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constituion modifier per channeler level after 1st Proficiencies Armor: Light Armor

Light Armor Weapons: Simple weapons

Simple weapons Tools: any 1 artisians tools Saving Throws: Wisdom, Constitution

Wisdom, Constitution Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Insight, Investigation, Perception Equipment You start with the following equipment, in addition to the equipment granted by your background: (a) a dagger or (b) 1 simple weapon

(a) Scholar's Pack or (b) any 1 Equipment Pack

Leather armor Source Magic With your ability to channel the energies of your Channelers Authority, you also gain the ability to cast a number of spells. Quick Cantrip At 1st Level you know 1 cantrip of your choice from the Channelers spell list. You do not gain additional cantrips as you level up, however, you can unlearn your cantrip during a long rest to learn a new cantrip from the Channelers spell list. Spells Known at First Level and Above At 1st Level you know 2 1st Level Spells, and at every Level past 1st, you learn 1 additional spell from any Spell Level including or bellow your Maximum Spell Level shown on the Channeler Class Table. When you Level up, you may unlearn any number of known spells equal to Half your Channeler Level, and learn any number of spells equal to the number you unlearnt.

Point Based Spellcasting Channelers, unlike most spellcasters don't use spell slots, instead they can sacrifice a number of 'Casting Points' to cast a spell. Cantrips are cast for free, but to cast spells from 1st level or higher, you must sacrifice a number of points corrosponding to the level of the spell from the list bellow. Spell Level Casing Points 1 2 2 3 3 5 4 6 5 7 Spells of Level 5 and bellow can only be cast twice each before become uncastable untill you take a long rest. Spellcasting Ability Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for Channeler Spells, since your magic is dependant on your ability to perceive and intuit, and thus manipulate the world around them. You use Wisdom whenever a spell refers to your Spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your wisdom modifyer when setting the saving throw DC for a Channeler spell you cast and when making an attack role with one. Spell Save DC = 8 + your proficiancy bonus + your wisdom modifyer Spell Attack Modifyer = your proficiancy bonus + your wisdom modifyer Spellcasting Focus A Channeler does not cast magic directly, and instead casts magic by manipulating the energies of their Channeler's Authority. Thus, they act as if they have a Focus at all times Channelers Authority Select a Channelers Authourity, the source of energy that you draw your power from, such as Humanity, Spirits, Pain or Realms. Your choice grants you features when you choose it at 1st level, and again at 3rd, 7th and 10th Level. Along with these features, it also grants you access to bonus Token Manifestations, whitch you gain at 2nd and 6th level. Token Manifestation Your channeling allows you to manifest Tokens, whitch are abilities or objects that can give you certain effects while you have them manifested. You learn Tokens from your Channelers Authority at 2nd and 6th Level, and when leveling up, you can gain new Tokens from the Token List at the end of Class Description, totalling so that you know tokens equal to the 'Known Tokens' list in your Class Table (ignoring your tokens learnt from your Channelers Authority). You can only have a number of Tokens manifested equal to your proficiancy bonus, so at 2nd Level, you can manifest 2, while at 5th Level, you can manifest 3. By taking a short rest, you can unmanifest any number of tokens equal to your Wisdom Modifyer or bellow, and manifest any number of tokens equal to the number you unmanifested.. By taking a long rest, you may Manifest any number of Tokens, and Manifest any number of tokens equal to that however many you unmanifested Some tokens can be manifested multiple times, those tokens are marked as '(Stackable)'. When you level up, you can unlearn any number of Tokens, equal to half your proficiancy bonus (rounded up), annd learn any number of Tokens equal to however many you unlearnt. Innate Meditation Whenever you take a short rest, you recover Casting Points equal to half your Channeler Level. Ability Score Improvement When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th level, you can increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability score above 20 using this feature.

Channelers Authorities At 1st Level, a Channeler selects an authority. This Authority is where they gain their powers from. These Authorities grant the Channeler features and manifestation tokens. You can select your Channelers Authority from the list bellow. Humanity Not limited to only humans, instead humanity refers to the whims and energies of all concious creatures. Oracle's Third Eye At 1st Level, when you select this Authority, you gain the ability to better sense the actions that someone has once taken. If you touch someone, you can roll an Investigation Check to see what they have done within the last 24 hours. Things a person are trying to hide are very difficult to see, while things they would be willing to give easily are very easy. Authority Token Starting at 2nd Level, and again at 6th Level, your authority gives you access to certain Token Manifestations that others can not access, these tokens are instantly learnt as you reach their prerequesit level. Badge of Talent (Stackable) 2nd Level This token manifests as a badge sewn into your clothing. If that clothing is removed, you lose this tokens effect. When you manifest this token, select one skill or tool that you are not proficiant in. While this token is manifested, you are proficiant in that skill. Charming Gaze 6th Level When this token is manifested, your eye's change from whatever color they where previously to a rainbow of colors. If you or the target are blinded, you can not use the effects of this Token. While this Token is manifested, you can use 1 Casting Point to cast Charm Person at any time. After the charm is completed, the charmed person does not know that they where charmed. Telepath At 7th Level, you can telepathically communicate with people within 60 feet of you. You can send thoughts to people within 60 feet of you freely, however, if you want them to be abkle to cummunicate with you while they are within 60 feet, you must preform a 10 minute ritual to create a link between your mind and their's. Aslong as 2 people are linked to you, they can also communicate with eachother, however, you also hear any thoughts they send to eachother. Embued Charisma Starting at 10th Level, you can use 5 Casting Points, and select 1 person within 30 feet of you. For the next 24 hours, you gain advantage on any Charisma based skills against that person. Spirits The energies of a Channeler under the Spirits Authority comes from those who have died. Not simply the undead, but all those who have died over the millenia's of existance. Spirit Sight Starting at Level 1, when you select this Authority, you can use 1 Casting Point, then select 1 person or creature within your line of sight. For 1 action (6 seconds) that person or creature can not see you. Authority Token Starting at 2nd Level, and again at 6th Level, your authority gives you access to certain Token Manifestations that others can not access, these tokens are instantly learnt as you reach their prerequesit level. Ghost Walk Level 2 When you manifest this token, it takes the form of of a ritualistic symbol imprinted somewhere on your body. While this Token is manifested, you can teleport up to 10 feet using your bonus action. Secret Assassin Level 6 When you manifest this token, it takes the form of of a peice of paper with anciant writing on it. You must be able to touch this token to active this tokens ability. By using 2 Casting points, you can cast Unseen Servant as a Level 1 spell. Unlike a normal Unseen Servant however, your Unseen Servant can attack. Defaultly, it holds an invisible dagger, doing 1d4 damage on an attack, but as an action, you can give it a different weapon. It is proficiant with all weapons you are. When your Unseen Servant attacks a target, the target may attack the Unseen Servant as a reaction, however, the target has disadvantage on this attack. Medium Starting at 7th Level, you can use any number of Casting Points to ask a dead person any number of questions equal to the number of Casting Points you used. This acts as if you cast Speak With Dead on the corpse, and follows the question answering as such. However, although you need to be in the place the person died in, you do not need to have the corpse. Spirit Form Starting at 10th Level, you gain the ability to use 5 Casting Points and become your Spirit Form for up too 1 minute. While in this form, you gain the following effects: you are invisible, you ignore tough terrain, you can fly at half your movement speed. Attacking or casting a spell in this form takes you out of Spirit Form.

Pain Despair and anguish, this is the energies a Channeler with the Authority of Pain use. Dread Infusal Starting at Level 1, when you select this Authority, whenever you take damage, you can use 1 Casting Point, and on your next attack roll done with a weapon, you can add half the damage you took to the attack. Authority Token Starting at 2nd Level, and again at 6th Level, your authority gives you access to certain Token Manifestations that others can not access, these tokens are instantly learnt as you reach their prerequesit level. WarForging (Stackable) Level 2 You need a weapon you are not proficiant in to manifest this ability. When you manifest this token, symbols. From now on, you can use that weapon as if you where Proficiant in it, and if the weapon is non-magical, it acts as if it is a magic weapon with no effect. Material Despair (Stackable) Level 6 You need a weapon to manifest this Token. When you manifest this token, you select a weapon, that weapon is surrounded by a dark mist. If used multiple times on the same weapon, the mist becomes thicker and darker. The weapon this is manifested on becomes a Magic Weapon if it is not already, and gains a +1 bonus to attack and damage. Metaphysical Tactition Starting at 7th Level, you can select a Fighting Style from the Fighter's Fighting Style list and gain its effects. If you have a long rest, you can choose to lose the effects of your chosen fighting style, and gain a new one. Karmatic Judgement Starting at 10th Level, whenever you take damage equal to or more then 20, you can roll a d10 and have the source of that damage take damage equal to your roll. Realms The non-material realms, as infinate and magestic as they are, is where the Channeler with Authority over Realms gets their energy. Unlocked Magic Starting at Level 1, when you select this Authority, you gain access to the Cantrip lists of all classes. From now on, when you take a chnage your cantrip with your 'Quick Cantrip' ability, you have access to the cantrip list of every spellcasting class. Also, you can change your cantrip during Short Rests also. Authority Token Starting at 2nd Level, and again at 6th Level, your authority gives you access to certain Token Manifestations that others can not access, these tokens are instantly learnt as you reach their prerequesit level. Forbidden Knowledge (Stackable) Level 2 This Token manifests as a book, you must be able to hold the book to use its effects. When this token is manifested, you can choose 1 Spell below level 5 that is in or below your 'Max Spell Level' as shown on the Channeler Class Table from the wizard spell list. You can cast that spell as if it was one of your known Channeler Spells. Power Source Rift Level 6 This token manifests as a small floating ball of energy the hovers around you. While this token is manifested, you gain casting points equal to your wisdom modifyer + half your Channeler Level. Occultist Starting at 7th Level, you always know when Magic is being used. You act as if you always have Detect Magic activted, however, to find out the school of magic the magic is coming from, or to determine the exact possition of the magic costs 1 Casting Point. Plane Walker Starting at 10th Level, you cast Contact Other Plane as a ritual by using 5 Casting Points. However, instead of a DC 15 Intelligence Saving Throw, you only have to suceed a DC 10 intelligence saving throw.

Tokens Bellow is a list of tokens the player can select from when they learn a new token through level up. Great Heels (Stackable) This token manifests as a marking on the heels of your feet. If you manifest this token multiple times, the markings grow increasingly large. If you are wearing shoes, or otherwise unable to have the heels of your feet touch the ground, this tokens effect does not work. While this token is manifested, you gain +5 movement speed. Artifact Inclined Level 10 This token manifests as a glove with arcane markings and anciant words scribled on top of its fabric. As long as you have one attunment slot open, you can touch a Magic Item with this glove, and attune to it in 10 minutes, instead of the usual short rest. Item Unoriginal (Stackable) This token manifests as a an object of your choice worth less then 5gp. If this token goes is further then 10 feet away from you, it will dissapear in 1 minute. If this token dissapears in this way, you can use a 1 minute ritual to get it back. When you unmanifest this Token, that object dissapears. Third Eye This token manifests as a tatoo or marking of an eye possitioned on your forehead. While this token is manifested, you gain +2 to passive perception. Channeler's Curse Level 5 This token manifests as a large burn like marking on the Channeler's face. While this token is manifested, you can have a spell of Level 4 or bellow be cast as if it was 1 spell level higher by usuing 1 additional Casting Point while casting the spell. This can only be done if the casted spell is atleast 1 level bellow your 'Max Spell Level' as stated in the Channeler Class Table Unlearnt Experience (Stackable) This token manifests as a peice of cloth, like a scarf or a cloth belt, with an introcate pattern in it. When you manifest this token, you can select 1 skill, and gain a bonus skill modifyer equal to half your Wisdom Modifyer (Rounded Down) Immaculate Resistance (Stackable) This token manifests as a natural plating on your skin, with a marking resembling a damage type of your choice. While this token is manifested, you gain resistance to the selected Damage Type. Warded Ability (Stackable) This token manifests as a small pixie like spirit that follows closely to you. When this token is manifested, select 1 ability, when you make a save using that ability, add 1d4 extra to the roll Witch Spell Level 5 This token manifests as an hat similar to that of a witches hat. While this token is manifested, you can cast the spell Hex as a First Level spell for 1 Casting Point, however, you can not transfer the spell to someone else after the person you cast it on has did or become unconcious. Lucky Motif (Stackable) This token manifests as a small lucky trincket (such as a rabits foot or a 4 leafed clover). Once per long rest, you can use the effect of the lucky feat to reroll any 1 dice roll. If you use this effect of this token, you can not un manifest this token untill you take a long rest. AfterMath Level 7 This token manifests as a small vial of infinatly deep clear liquid. After you kill a creature, injesting this bottle will restore 1d10 health Miricle Rod This token manifests as a small rod with a devine ingraving somewhere on it. While this token is manifested, you can cast the Prestidigitation cantrip as a second cantrip Token Companion This token manifests as a familier, choosing from the listed familiers from the Find Companion spell. That familier acts as if you summoned it by using a Find Familier Spell.