Radiation measuring equipment is being installed at the 1,400 nurseries, primary and junior high schools in the prefecture, according to the local government, in an attempt to allay parents' fears.

Japanese Officials have repeated that there is no threat to human health for anyone outside the 18-mile exclusion imposed around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, which was seriously damaged in the March 11 earthquake and tsunami.

Parents who have expressed concern over the radiation that continues to leak from the plant will not have been reassured, however, by the admission on Tuesday by Tokyo Electric Power Co. that levels of radioactive iodine-131 in seawater off the plant's damaged No. 2 reactor are 7.5 million times higher than normal.

Tepco has been unable to stem leaks of highly radioactive water from the facility. Efforts to date have included pouring concrete into a cracked maintenance pit before turning to a polymer used in nappies mixed with sawdust and shredded newspaper.

Neither method has proved effective and Tepco engineers are still trying to identify the exact source of the leak.

The company continued to pump water with low levels of radiation out of the basements of the reactor buildings and subterranean trenches on Tuesday. The decision to dump the water into the Pacific has increased concern among local fishermen and neighbouring countries.

Banri Kaieda, the industry minister, apologised on Tuesday for being forced to pump the water into the ocean but maintained that the radiation will be quickly dispersed by the currents and poses no risk to human health.

Earlier in the day, the fisheries minister announced that the government would make inspections of marine produce more stringent and more frequent in waters off the eastern coast of Japan. The government also imposed a legal limit for radioactive iodine in fish.

Tepco officials announced on Tuesday that it will start drawing up estimates for compensation for people who lived or had farms or businesses close to the plant. More than 80,000 people have been forced to leave their homes and the government has admitted that it may be many years before they can return.

Tepco will reimburse them for any medical expenses, lost income and will cover their living costs, with the first payments of Y20 million (£146,200) to be distributed among the residents of nine villages nearest to the plant.

The latest casualty figures from the March 11 disasters show that 12,321 people were killed while a further 15,347 remain missing.