Your inner nerd will find paradise here. That’s right, we are talking about the pilgrimage, the holy trail every nerd needs to walk – the San Diego Comic Con. And if, like us, this year was another hit-and-miss; fret not! Here is a look at other Comic Cons you can probably head to with Pickyourtrail –

London Film and Comic Con

Held since 2004, this convention has had a legacy of hosting actors from Harry Potter, Doctor Who, Star Trek and Star Wars. This year hosts guests the likes of Benedict Cumberbatch, Natalie Dormer, Kevin Smith, Emily Kinney.

For all you move nerds, unfortunately, this convention is just 6 days away. Benedict watch another year, then!

Olympia London: July 28 – 30

Asia Pop Comic Convention

Also known as Comic Con Manila or APCC, it features a variety of international brand of comics, music, animation and films falling under the category of pop culture. Stage shows are often held here.

SMX Convention Center, Manila: August 25 – 27

Reserve your attendance here

Read more: How to get your favourite comic character’s homeland!

Oz Comic Convention

Beginning in the year 2012, Australia got its very own comic con – running currently in Perth, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Adelaide. This year you can look at visiting the comic con at

Brisbane: September 23 – 24

Sydney: September 30 – October 1

Reserve your attendance here

More: Heading over this year is Aquaman, also Khal Drogo from Game of Thrones, Jason Mamoa.

Russia Comic Con



Inaugurated in 2014, this convention celebrates films, serials, computer and board games, entertaining literature, comics, anime and manga. Here is a glimpse at what the Russian Comic

Moscow: September 28 – October 1

Here’s at a look at what the Con has in store for you ~

Reserve your attendance here

New York Comic Con

Yes, Big Apple gets its very own comic con! Started in 2006, this one is dedicated to comics, graphic novels, anime, manga, video games, toys, and movies!

New York: October 5 – 8

Reserve your attendance here

More: Guess who is headed this way all the way from Westeros? That’s right – Lena Headey, who plays Cersei Lannister in the HBO series Game of Thrones!

Comic Con Experience

Begun in Brazil in the year 2014, it caters to fans of comics, TV series, video games, movies, literature and more. To be held December this year, there is plenty of time to plan this out.

São Paulo: December 7 – 10

Reserve your attendance here.

All you nerds excited? Well get going and plan your next Comic Convention rendezvous with us.

We service music nerds, too. Tomorrowland? Sunburn? Burning Man? State your wish, we will grant it!