CHARLOTTESVILLE – Undisciplined penalties, ghastly turnovers and fed-up fans exiting Scott Stadium early: Friday night was Virginia football under Mike London encapsulated.

Boise State embarrassed the Cavaliers 56-14, and the difference, in personnel, preparation and coaching, was as glaring as the final score indicates.

The Broncos’ offense, defense and special teams were superior throughout, and while long a quality program, let’s not forget they arrived here unranked and had a true freshman quarterback making his first collegiate start.

But rather than take advantage, rather than give its ever-dwindling fan base a glimmer of hope, Virginia authored its most inept performance since the 2-10 debacle of 2013. The Cavaliers committed five turnovers – Matt Johns threw two pick-sixes -- and nine penalties, and the final quarter was witnessed by more Boise State fans than Virginia.

The scene was reminiscent of Nov. 28, 2009, when in Al Groh’s final game as coach the Cavaliers lost at home to Virginia Tech 42-13.

U.Va. football in pictures.

Eight games remain in London’s sixth, and almost certainly, final season leading the program. The primary questions now:

Can Virginia (1-3) shed Friday’s haunting images and salvage something, anything, from the year? And might the administration, athletic director Craig Littlepage and university president Teresa Sullivan, consider relieving London, a wonderful nurturer but overmatched big whistle, before season’s end?

A bye week looms, the most logical time for such a move. But given London’s gracious air and the school’s genteel nature, I suspect they hold off.

And really, what would an immediate firing accomplish? Everyone understands the likely end game, and it’s not like Littlepage and his top lieutenant, Jon Oliver, can begin interviewing potential successors.

Virginia committed nine for 80 yards, many on special teams. Virginia committed nine for 80 yards, many on special teams. SEE MORE VIDEOS

Besides, if you can just ignore Friday’s margin for a moment, I think it’s safe to say that the only teams remaining on Virginia’s schedule that might approach Boise State/Notre Dame/UCLA caliber are Georgia Tech and Virginia Tech.

I harken to 2003. Clemson faithful pleaded for Tommy Bowden’s turfing after a 28-point loss at Wake Forest left the Tigers at 5-4. Clemson closed the season with four victories, including an upset of No. 6 Tennessee in the Peach Bowl, and Bowden was voted ACC Coach of the Year.

Not to suggest Virginia is going to win nine games and that London should clear a spot for a plaque. But if the team that challenged Notre Dame throughout and played decently for a half at UCLA reappears, the Cavaliers will be competitive.

None of which excuses Friday.

“After our first play from scrimmage,” London said, “it all went downhill.”

Self-inflicted turnovers have plagued Virginia quarterbacks for years, but Johns had avoided the malady – until Friday’s first snap. Looking deep for T.J. Thorpe off a play-action fake, Johns was swarmed by the rush, and rather than take the sack, he blindly flipped the ball forward. Defensive tackle Justin Taimatuia gladly accepted the gift and cruised 21 yards for a touchdown.

“It was just a stupid play by me, really,” Johns said.

It got worse.

Keyed by Jeremy McNichols’ 47-yard sprint around left end, Boise State scored a touchdown on its first series and, after Johns’ second pick, added a field goal for a 17-0 bulge. This marked the fourth time in as many games that the Cavaliers trailed by double-figures.

Thorpe gave Virginia a pulse when he turned a deep out from Johns into a 75-yard touchdown on his first catch as a Cavalier – I could have sworn he stepped out-of-bounds, but a replay review confirmed the score.

But even on that play, defensive end Tyler Horn flattened Johns, part of the Broncos’ night-long harassment of Virginia’s quarterbacks. Johns was sacked three times combined in the season’s first three games. Boise State had four, one that forced Johns into an intentional-grounding penalty in his end zone, a safety.

That’s on the offensive line for failing to block, even when Boise State (3-1) rushed just three. That’s on the offensive coaching staff for not adjusting protections.

Run blocking was no better as Virginia rushed for 40 yards on 33 carries.

The defense and its coaches fared as poorly. For the second time this season, the Cavaliers faced a true freshman quarterback, and for the second time they made him look like a seasoned all-star.

Much like UCLA’s Josh Rosen in the opener, Boise State’s Brett Rypien threw for 321 yards and three touchdowns without an interception – Virginia has yet to force a turnover in 2015 and has committed nine.

Virginia enters its bye week with the eight-game ACC schedule to follow. The start would be welcoming for most teams.

First the Cavaliers head to Pittsburgh (2-1), which has lost tailback James Conner, the conference’s 2014 Player of the Year, to a knee injury. Moreover, incumbent quarterback Chad Voytik has been unseated by Nate Peterman.

Virginia hasn’t won a road game since 2012 at North Carolina State – the losing streak is 11 – but of its four ACC trips, Pitt appears the least daunting. The Cavaliers’ other league roadies are at North Carolina, Miami and Louisville.

Following Pitt, Virginia returns home to face Syracuse. The Orange is 3-0 entering Saturday’s visit from No. 8 LSU but is down to its third quarterback.