For political leaders and strategists in both parties, the start of voting holds unusual fascination this winter because several political patterns and customs are on the line. Some Democrats say the 2016 campaign could mark the “death of inevitability” if Mrs. Clinton loses the first two nominating contests, in Iowa and New Hampshire, despite beginning the race with a deep bench of donors, high approval ratings among Democrats and establishment support. She is still ahead in national polls. But Mr. Sanders is seen as empowering regular voters against the will of party apparatchiks.

“In the Democratic race and also the Republican one, what was once marginal — a far-left Sanders candidacy, a celebrity Trump candidacy — has now become mainstream,” said former Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, a Democrat who ran for president in 2008. “We have to take better care of our progressive wing, particularly our younger voters, or we will become a minority party. I’m not saying move left on everything, but the big issues should be wages and economic growth.”

Voters will also determine if new political movements can still rise to power in America. The two-party system has usually produced traditional nominees in recent decades; the counterculture movement of the 1960s, the post-Watergate era in the 1970s, the Gingrich revolution in the 1990s and the Tea Party movement of recent years did not crown truly groundbreaking standard-bearers in either party. This year could be different, given that so many assumptions about the campaign have proved wrong so far.

“Universal dismissal of Trump and Sanders. Consensus that a Bush-Clinton face-off was pretty much inevitable. Underestimation of Cruz,” Robert Shrum, a veteran Democratic strategist, said, naming a few. “Clinton remains the clear favorite, but there is a liberal impulse in the party that has made her path clearly more complicated.”

Doris Kearns Goodwin, a presidential historian, said the coming caucuses and primaries would show whether Mr. Trump’s fame and style of campaigning — through Twitter and television appearances, large rallies, and provocative and at times offensive language — was enough to prevail against Republican “super PACs” and candidates with strong donor bases.