Leave it to reddit to open our minds on the stark differences of our eating habits around the world.

Redditor user itsrattlesnake has created an interesting photo project that unbiasedly documents the ready-to-eat meals (MREs) armies are equipped with while on the field. Thanks to itsrattlesnake, we learned a couple of interesting things about the men and women who dedicate their lives to protecting their countries and its citizens. One, candy is a must. And two, a heating device is an invaluable part of an MRE (because really, we all deserve a warm meal).

From this glimpse into the window of the army's food world, we also get a look of how each country packs its culture with them on the go. The Italians start their day with a shot of alcohol (smart thinking), the British are supplied with tons of tea (naturally), and the French, well the French go fancy with duck confit, deer pate and a Dupont d'Isigny caramel. (And no, the Spanish are not supplied condoms in their MREs, despite what it may look like in the picture below -- so lets just get your mind out of the gutter already.)

Take a look at how these 11 countries feed their men and women in service. If you have any information on how other countries prepare their MREs, we'd love to hear about it in the comments section below.

1 Germany You're looking at: Sour cherry and apricot jams, several sachets of grapefruit and exotic juice powder to add to water, Italian biscotti, liver-sausage spread and rye bread, and Goulash with potatoes. 2 Canada You're looking at: Bear Paws snacks, salmon fillet with Tuscan sauce or vegetarian couscous for the main meal, the makings of a peanut butter and jelly (raspberry jam) sandwich for breakfast and a shocking omission of maple syrup. 3 United States You're looking at: Almond poppy seed pound cake, cranberries, spiced apple cider, peanut butter and crackers, pasta with vegetable "crumbles" in spicy tomato sauce and a flameless heater – it heats up enough to warm the plastic meal pouch. 4 France You're looking at: Deer pâté, cassoulet with duck confit, creole-style pork and a crème chocolate pudding, some coffee and flavored drink powder, muesli for breakfast and a little Dupont d'Isigny caramel. (There is also a disposable heater.) 5 Italy You're looking at: A breakfast shot of 40 percent alcohol cordiale (seriously), a powdered cappuccino, lots of biscotti, a pasta and bean soup, canned turkey and a rice salad. Dessert is a power sport bar, canned fruit salad or a muesli chocolate bar. (And there's a disposable camping stove for heating parts of the meal.) 6 UK You're looking at: Kenco coffee, Typhoo tea, a mini bottle of Tabasco, chicken tikka masala, a vegetarian pasta, pork and beans for breakfast, trail mix, an apple "fruit pocket" with packets of Polos. 7 Estonia You're looking at: Stuffed peppers, chicken-meat pâté, smoked sprats, liver sausage with potatoes, crispbreads, halva with vanilla (for dessert), and muesli with fruit pocket and honey. 8 Australia You're looking at: Vegemite, jam sandwich biscuits, a tube of sweetened condensed milk, meatballs, chili tuna pasta, a can-opener-spoon for getting at the Fonterra processed cheddar cheese, lots of sweets, soft drinks, and two unappetizing-looking bars labelled "chocolate ration." 9 Denmark You're looking at: Earl Grey tea, beans and bacon in tomato sauce, a golden oatie biscuit and Rowntree's Tooty Frooties. (Also, a flameless heater.) 10 Spain You're looking at: Cans of green beans with ham, squid in vegetable oil, pate, a sachet of powdered vegetable soup, crackers, and peaches in syrup for dessert. (There is a disposable heater with matches and fuel tabs, as well as lots of tablets: Vitamin C, glucose, water purification and rehydration.) 11 Singapore Imgur: www.mindef.gov.sg You're looking at: Butter-flavored biscuits, instant noodles, isotonic drink, Ego fish-shaped biscuit, honey teriyaki chicken noodle, sweet potato in red bean soup, apple and blueberry bar and mini packs of Mentos.