Last Friday a left-wing nutjob Bernie Bro stabbed two people to death on a Portland, OR train. The left naturally doesn’t want to take ownership of this maniac so they are blaming what he did on President Trump and the right. Portland’s mayor, citing the double-murder, is trying to shut down a right-wing rally in the city planned for next month. Like all liberals, the mayor insists that he is the expert on what speech is protected and what speech should be suppressed.

KATU reports that the Trump Free Speech Rally Portland is scheduled for June 2 in the city. Unfortunately for the liberal-controlled city, this rally is taking place in a plaza run by the federal government so the lefties can’t just pull the permit.

Mayor Ted Wheeler actually held a press conference to demand that the federal government pull the permit for the rally. First he said that Portland would never issue a permit to an “alt-right” group and then he told the feds to follow his example of intolerance.

“I’m calling on the federal government to immediately revoke any permit or permits they’ve issued for the June 4th event,” said Wheeler.

Forgetting that Portland has been the scene of massive leftist violence and destruction since Donald Trump’s election, Wheeler said he worries more about what the right is up to.

“My concern is they’re coming here to peddle a message of hatred and bigotry,” Wheeler said.

Well, so what? They have a Constitutional right to assemble and speak their minds, right? Not according to Portland’s mayor:

“They have a First Amendment right to speak, but hate speech is not protected,” Wheeler claimed.

Hate speech is most certainly protected speech. Just because a liberal doesn’t like what somebody has to say doesn’t mean it is not protected by the 1st Amendment. The whole point of the free speech is to protect even the most unpopular speech.

Portland is trying to be like all of the liberal universities across the country that regularly shut down right-wing and conservative points of view they disagree with. The liberal fascism is spreading off of the campuses and into the governments controlled by radical liberal kooks.

Wheeler concluded his demand that the feds pull the permits by using the Portland train stabbing committed by a crazy Bernie Sanders supporter as the reason why right-wing groups have no right to assemble in the city.

“Our city is in mourning, our community’s anger is real, and the timing and subject of these events can only exacerbate an already difficult situation,” said Wheeler.

Would it shock you to find out that Ted Wheeler is a democrat? I didn’t think so.

Back in February, Wheeler held a press conference to say how much worse it is when police shoot a black man than a white man, so he definitely has that guilty white liberal thing down. In trying to silence a group he disagrees with he also has the liberal fascist asshole thing going.

Follow Brian Anderson on Twitter