Keep checking back for updated cuts. They're added to the list below as they happen.

The Giants have begun paring down their final roster to get to the mandatory 53-man limit by 9 p.m. today, and there's already been confirmation of two players' being let go.

Defensive end Matt Broha was waived and will be asked to join the practice squad if he clears waivers, according to his agent Bill Deni on Twitter. Broha had 3½ sacks in the preseason. Word is Adewale Ojomo has made the active roster, though it's unclear at this point what Adrian Tracy's fate will be.

Meanwhile, the Giants have released defensive tackle Marcus Thomas, according to Thomas' tweets.

"It was fun working with a great organization like the giants and for y'all giant fans," Thomas tweeted. "I could only imagine if I started my career here."

Good for Thomas, by the way, to have a sense of humor about things.

"Oh yea I found a no toll route," he added. "it didn't cost me a penny to get cut POW"

Sadly, Thomas appears to have spiked the ball before reaching the end zone.

"How can I get here without paying a toll and on the way out hit two toll booths," he tweeted. "did y'all plant those on my route because that's a real lol"

Other quick notes as we get going:

--The Cowboys might have interest in WR David Douglas, according to my man Calvin Watkins of ESPN Dallas. I was told last night trying to slip him through waivers and onto the practice squad might be a dangerous move because a few teams were lurking. We'll see.

--DB Laron Scott tweeted he's "STAYING IN THE BIG APPLE." I don't know if he means practice squad or active roster, so stay tuned on that front.

--TE Larry Donnell has been waived but will be added to the practice squad if he clears.

* * * *

Here's your running roster that we will continue to update as news comes in:

OFFENSE (28)

QB: Eli Manning, David Carr, Ryan Perrilloux

RB: Ahmad Bradshaw, David Wilson, Andre Brown, Da’Rel Scott

FB: Henry Hynoski

WR: Hakeem Nicks, Victor Cruz, Domenik Hixon, Rueben Randle, Ramses Barden, Jerrel Jernigan

TE: Martellus Bennett, Bear Pascoe, Adrien Robinson

C: David Baas, Jim Cordle, Chris White

G: Kevin Boothe, Chris Snee, Mitch Petrus, Stephen Goodin

T: Will Beatty, David Diehl, Sean Locklear, James Brewer



DEFENSE (29)

DE: Jason Pierre-Paul, Justin Tuck, Osi Umenyiora, Adewale Ojomo, Adrian Tracy

DT: Linval Joseph, Rocky Bernard, Marvin Austin, Markus Kuhn, Shaun Rogers

LB: Michael Boley, Chase Blackburn, Mathias Kiwanuka, Mark Herzlich, Keith Rivers, Spencer Paysinger, Jacquian Williams

CB: Corey Webster, Prince Amukamara, Terrell Thomas, Michael Coe, Jayron Hosley, Justin Tryon, Laron Scott, Dante Hughes

S: Antrel Rolle, Kenny Phillips, Will Hill, Stevie Brown



SPECIALS (3)

K: Lawrence Tynes

P: Steve Weatherford

LS: Zak DeOssie



CUTS (14)*

RB D.J. Ware

DE Matt Broha

DT Marcus Thomas

CB Bruce Johnson (to injured reserve)

TE Larry Donnell

WR Isaiah Stanback

LB Greg Jones

OT Matt McCants

LB Jake Muasau

DE Craig Marshall

WR David Douglas

WR Dan DePalma

OL Selvish Capers

DT Dwayne Hendricks

*Reported by me unless otherwise linked

RESERVE/SUSPENDED LIST (1)

S Tyler Sash

Note: This entry originally had Sash listed in the cuts section above with a designation in brackets he was being put on the reserve/suspended list. But obviously that was too much for people like The Sports Network to comprehend. They erroneously reported that I and Ralph Vacchiano of the Daily News reported Sash was cut. So no thanks to those guys for making me, Vacchiano and Sash look bad.

BUBBLE GUYS WHO HAVE APPARENTLY MADE IT

DE Adewale Ojomo

DE Adrian Tracy

RB Andre Brown

RB Da'Rel Scott

S Stevie Brown

DT Marvin Austin (for now; he's one of three candidates for short-term IR, a designation that would come on Tuesday)

WR Ramses Barden

WR Jerrel Jernigan

Mike Garafolo: mgarafolo@starledger.com; twitter.com/MikeGarafolo