It was really hard to go back to day two of training. My thighs have been especially sore from the squats and rowing that we did yesterday, and I had no idea what was in store for me. Thankfully, the program was a little more lenient, but not by much.

We started off with five solid minutes of jump rope. I thought that this would be easy–I had fun with it back in elementary school, so why not now? Nope. I was tired after the first two minutes. Then our trainer started to try to get us two double time our ropes, meaning we would jump, the rope would click the ground twice, and then we’d jump again. It took a ton of concentration, and I failed at it overall.

Next, we learned about Tabata exercises, which is a form of short interval training. For twenty seconds do as many reps of the assigned exercise as you can – then rest 10 seconds. Continue until two minutes are up per exercise. We did these for sit ups, supermans, and squats. Supermans require you to lie on your belly, then pick up your legs and arms–I personally felt silly doing them and they definitely hurt my lower back.

Next, we learned deadweight lifts, push presses, kettlebell swings, and wall-ball throws. Deadweight lifts are exactly as they sound: take a heavyweight and try to pick it up off the ground. A push press is where you take a weight while standing, and push it up over your head. For those of you who have been following me since 4HB (4 Hour Body), you will know what a kettlebell swing is, but for those who haven’t, it just means swinging a weight from between your legs to over your head. I did 92lbs, 34lbs, and 15lbs respectively.

The wall-ball throws was definitely the most difficult technique for me yesterday. To do a proper wall-ball throw, hold a medicine ball (I used an 8lb ball), squat, then throw the ball up to the ceiling, and then catch it.

This guy doesn’t make it look hard, but it was definitely a challenge for me! The weight of the medicine ball makes itself known and my legs were y in pain from the Tabata squats. But it wasn’t time to call it quits yet; I still had to complete the timed exercise.

The routine was simple: 10 deadlifts, 10 assisted ring pull ups, and 10 wall-ball throws, then 8, 6, 4, 2, end. My final time was 8:03. Not bad.

I came home ravenous, ate an entire pound of steamed mussels by myself in addition to an apple with honey and some 85% chocolate. I wonder if my body is craving carbs after such an extreme workout, considering how few (50-100g) carbs I get in an average day. Hmm. Today, I’m going to try eating an apple and a plum beforehand, and see if that helps.

But seriously, I could have eaten a bear.

Advertisements