Dale Earnhardt Jr. winning the Daytona 500 is considered a good thing for NASCAR. Its most popular driver the last 11 years winning its most prestigious event certainly should generate interest in the sport.

But NASCAR Chairman Brian France says it’s not just the Earnhardt win that could help the sport.

MORE: Earnhardt having fun again | Can Earnhardt win championship? | Daytona Winners & Losers

“The really great thing is how authentic he’s been throughout the week here as he’s doing (the media tour),” France said in a phone interview Wednesday. “That’s great. We’ll have to see (on the impact).”

Earnhardt won the Daytona 500 for the second time, with the first coming in 2004 before the world of Twitter and in the infancy of social media. Now, Earnhardt is tweeting photos during his winner's media tour and that has gotten an already enthusiastic Junior Nation looking forward to the rest of the season even more. The victory also all but guarantees him a spot in the Chase.

“Anytime his fanbase gets revved up, that’s a good thing,” France said. “That’s good for him, and that’s good for us.”

PHOTOS: Earnhardt celebration | Daytona 500 gallery

The victory nearly didn’t happen Sunday as the race was threatened by a seven-hour rain delay. NASCAR’s new track drying system was able to get the track ready in 90 minutes in what likely would have been at least a 150-minute process in past years. The race went green around 8:30 p.m. and ended at about 11:25 p.m., and it's debatable whether NASCAR and Fox would have agreed to restart the race much later than 9.

“I don’t know if we would have even been running on Monday with the weather the way it was,” France said. “It allowed us to get the race in and that’s a big deal for us. It worked out great.”

With rain pushing the Daytona 500 to night for the second time in the last three years, it brings up the question of whether NASCAR would consider a move to night for that race.

France says the sanctioning body already has considered it but Fox and the racetrack would also want to move it for it to happen.

“We have considered it and for lots of reasons have not done that,” France said. “But it’s always a consideration. Of course, it’s not just our decision. Fox has to believe that’s the right time and all the rest.”