Martin Lehmann says that between Afghanistan’s war and Thailand’s tsunami, he has photographed “so many dead people you wouldn’t believe it.” Yet nothing has affected him more than Rose, a little girl with “half a heart” who lived in Copenhagen, his hometown.

Seven years ago, he got a call from his family’s babysitter, Birgitte, saying she was too upset to come to work. At 21 weeks pregnant, she had just learned her baby would be born with a defect that would disrupt the infant’s blood flow. Birgitte grappled with decisions, from having an abortion to allowing surgery after birth.

She returned to work a few days later, and she suggested that Mr. Lehmann photograph her baby right after birth. “Every family has a picture of their child on the wall,” she told him. “And we wanted one good picture of the baby.”

He agreed, intrigued by the idea of ordinary people facing major medical decisions. But he also knew his own emotional limitations. He was already working on a book about a drug addict, which was taking a toll. And there was no question that Rose’s story was going to end badly.

“Death was a part of this from the beginning,” he said.

Photo

He listened as Birgitte explained her dilemma. There was a choice she and her husband had to make and they could not agree. Children with this condition must have the first of three surgeries shortly after birth. The procedures must hew to a particular order, usually before the age of 3. None cures the problem. In the case of Birgitte’s baby, palliative care was offered as the alternative to surgery.

The couple chose surgery.

Baby Rose was born on Aug. 22, 2008, and Mr. Lehmann was there with his camera. He fell in love with Rose immediately. “At that time, there was no return,” he said.

One week later, Rose’s first operation was successful, except for a breathing complication, which just meant that the second operation would be done sooner. The baby left the hospital in December. As Mr. Lehmann grew closer to the family, Rose’s illness was not his sole focus. Instead, he captured everyday family life, like Rose playing with her sister or the family gathering in a common room.

“I was much more the person Martin than I was a photographer with a lot of big cameras jumping around on the table trying to find a good angle,” he said.

No one was worried when it came time for Rose’s third surgery in June 2011, especially as the first two had gone so well. But there was a complication. After surgery, Rose’s heart developed a problem with a valve. Surgeons needed to operate. Right before the procedure, Birgitte heard an anesthesiologist shout, “The child must be ventilated now!” Soon after, Rose entered into surgery, which went well.

Or so Birgitte thought.

But later, a scan revealed damage to parts of Rose’s brain, which Birgitte believes came from those 30 minutes without oxygen right before the surgery. Her speech was nearly gone, her vision affected, and she could not eat on her own.

Mr. Lehmann admitted that “there were many tough moments,” and they were, at times, beyond his camera. He spent night after night on the phone with Birgitte, listening to her talk about Rose. He found it interesting that unlike the typical dynamic between subject and photographer, Birgitte was reaching out to him.

“What should you say to a person like that?” he said. “Should I say to her, ‘Excuse me, I’m just a photographer, you can call a therapist’? Of course I talked with her.”

Over the next few years, the family adjusted as best they could. They changed apartments and put Rose in a school for children with special needs. Mr. Lehmann continued to shoot at his daily newspaper, visiting the family on and off.

Then, in the spring of 2014, there was another blow.

Photo

On Friday, April 18, Rose was admitted to the hospital for low oxygen. By Monday morning, a doctor said Rose needed to go into the intensive care unit.

“In that moment I said, no,” Birgitte recalled. “No way. She’s not going to intensive care unit. We did that three years ago.”

Birgitte asked how long Rose had to live. The doctor said it could be hours, days or weeks. But the nurses told her she would probably die that afternoon.

Birgitte called the family to the hospital.

While they were on their way, Birgitte sat by Rose, who started to say something. It was Adda. Adda. Adda. She said it six times, until Lara, her sister, whom she was calling, arrived.

Rose breathed deeply twice, then stretched out. Then, she was gone.

Birgitte called Mr. Lehmann immediately.

“You are a friend,” she told him. “You have been here from the beginning and now it is ending. Please come.”

She wanted him to come to the apartment where she was going to take Rose’s body. He admits he was at first a little sickened.

“I was thinking you know, oh, she is laying in there, just 5 years old and she looks like my own daughter, I didn’t like the feeling,” he said.

But when he saw Rose in her crib surrounded by her toys and loved ones, he teared up and thought, “I really understand.”

“Nobody promised that you can have a good life, that you should have perfect kids,” he said. “Nobody promised you that everything would be O.K. Pain is a part of life. And death is a part of life. It is the most clear part of life. I think a little more about that now.”

Photo

Follow @Rena_Silverman, @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Lens is also on Facebook.