Summary

Despite many prevailing theories about the role of the Podestas, Soros and Alefantis in the Comet Ping Pong cover-up, the contemporary art-themed restaurant appears to be tied to the Geffen Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, otherwise known as MOCA. There’s no doubt that the gallery serves as a meeting point for all of these groups, but the smoking gun is rather unexpected -- several Comet Ping Pong performers also pass through the network of galleries, suggesting that there is a larger organization in play.

David Geffen, Heather Podesta, Jeffrey Soros and Ukrainian oligarch Victor Pinchuk are all part on the board.

Board of Directors

Understanding the Source Material

Source material will provide evidence that all aforementioned names are part of a loosely-organized group that come together under the guise of contemporary art. Further evidence reveals ties to the political left, but most insidiously, occult rituals and the specter of pizza-related activity associated with Comet Ping Pong.

Reviving the Geffen Angle

Billionaire and LA icon Geffen was linked to pedophile ring with Marc-Collins Rector, Brock Pierce and Bryan Singer.

This article shows the relationship between the Geffen circle and the Clinton Foundation. But the discovery of the involvement of all these parties at MOCA suggests something far more compelling--that Clinton Foundation work done under the umbrella of helping provide health access to third world country (CHAI - Clinton Health Access Initiative) is actually connected to a loosely-organized group of museums known as ‘MOCA’.

Disobedient Media Writeup

MOCA Galas inviting dozens of a-list celebrities and billionaires.

Former MTV boss Sumner Redstone

https://i.imgur.com/iZOS5Yl.jpg

Jane Fonda

Heather Podesta at MOCA.

Jeffrey Soros - https://imgur.com/a/XlHLG - Support for Comet Ping Pong from the Soros family tied to contemporary art dealing. Remember Soros’ affiliation with Comet

Or how Jeff Koons donated money to Correct The Record

Jeff Koons at MOCA gala honoring him

Nicky Hilton Rothschild at MOCA. Very interesting that both the DC art ring and Los Angeles group courted by Rothschilds.

Jeff Koons has been a key figure in this investigation because of his relationship between American politicians, ICMEC and the Rothschilds. Photo with Philippine de Rothschild.

MOCA - A closer look at the evidence

MOCA Exterior. Known as the pioneer of pop-up exhibits, or rather, the ‘temporary contemporary’, MOCA has been an innovative force in the scene. But the motives behind its exhibit model could be related to its political affiliations. Notice the pizza slice on this mural..

Abramovic’s infamous decapitation dinner took place at MOCA, with the help of Hollywood actors and performers. While there’s no doubt that there’s a performative aspect to the dinner, it also suggests even closer links between globalist liberal elite and Satanic art rituals, regardless of your view on them - https://i.imgur.com/TOrTaC9.jpg

https://imgur.com/a/XlHLG

Kenneth Anger’s affiliation with MOCA is interesting because he appears to be insinuating modern art galleries contain a lurid underground in this video directed by him, one including chickens tied to the wall. But it turns out that not only is he a regular at MOCA, but they are doing a special retrospective on him. Not saying he isn’t a bad artist, but c’mon! Podesta. Soros. Hollywood bigwigs. Satanic rituals.

Bloggers have been made for years accusing Kenneth Anger of “blatant pedophilia” and of having Rothschild links. THIS IS THE FUCKING LINK.

Brian Butler and Kenneth Anger “Naked Hollywood” Kenneth Anger - Lucifer Rising

Butler has been described as the “heir” to Aleister Crowley and Kenneth Anger. The article reveals close ties between the LA contemporary art community and Black Magick.

This PDF shows that “Cameron”, a California-based performance artist. Held sex magick rituals in Los Angeles, and of course was featured at the MOCA gallery.

Here we have a Robert Rauschenberg piece at MOCA featuring chickens and cages

Here we see MOCA’s endless A-list celebrity presence

Panorama of the coffin mural at Moca

Linda Ramone at MOCA - longtime friend of Marina Abramovic, attended Chris Cornell’s funeral

Trump admin involved - Steven Mnuchin on their board of trustees

The combination of Rothschild/Soros/Geffen/Podesta/Pinchuk (once Clinton Foundation’s largest individual donor) is particularly troubling because it shows that they have an entire warehouse (along with an infinite network of artist’s workshops) located in that one district. One that includes a satanic pizzeria, a Tyson Farms warehouse and what I assume is a particularly extensive drainage system going into the Los Angeles River.

Rothschild-linked artist has mural around the corner.

Rothschild's Painted sailboat

But the social connections to celebrities are important here too. We have this strange link between Katy Perry and a Podesta-run gallery that that practices black magic. That seems like the perfect profile of someone offering themselves to the devil, and talking about “playing ping pong all night long” while wearing Lolita sunglasses and pizza earrings.

Katy Perry at Moca

Linkin Park also ran exhibits in LA Arts District - Pictured at ‘Known Gallery’

We also see the same group of artists doing strange things--like holding a Kurt Cobain-themed art show in Seattle. Note the presence of a pizza slice and of artist Carroll Dunham, father of Lena Dunham.

But then you also see the presence of actual Comet Ping Pong performers at this venue. This was a part of the connection I couldn’t quite dole out in my previous post on Los Angeles. But it’s a pretty astounding one.

Evidence Continued in Comments.