Love this album. Normally, lyrics are something I start to listen to after several listens to an album, if a) they don't bother me immediately and make me stop listening, or b) the music (chords, melodies, timing, arrangement, etc.) is good enough to bring me back for repeated listening's. This album is very unusual for me in that the music registered as good immediately (typical good mwY instrumentation and song structure), but the lyrics starting blowing me away on my very first listen. I don't recall this ever really happening for me. On my third listen, in my car, I had to keep stopping the play so I could 'digest' what I just heard, conceptually. I do like good lyrics, but I usually don't notice just how 'clever' they are until I've heard them a few times. In this case, there are so many lines that are PACKED with so much information that they just explode in my mind. So I had to start pausing and getting my stuff together before venturing into the next intense onslaught. Musically, this album is made of that good, solid fabric that all myY albums are made of - they always sound fresh and not over-rehearsed-to-sterility, but tight. They always sound like they have lots of good music in abundant supply, like they could cut a hundred records today if you just let the tape keep rolling. This is probably an illusion of their style, but its a darn effective illusion. Instrumentally these guys sound like the ultimate garage band. Lyrically, this album almost reminds me of something David Eugene Edwards (16 Horsepower, Wovenhand) might produce - but not in a derivative sense. Lyrically, this is a refinement to the already brilliant catalogue of mwY, but somehow with even more apocalyptic intensity! Wow. So... I'm kinda blown away from by this album. The part that has rocked me the most: "In a dream last night I was somewhere near Virginia, rebuking Satan with ironic faithfulness. Satan turned to me and said, "Eloi Eloi, have you thought much about that cry? Have you thought much about that cry? Eloi Eloi Have you thought much about that line lama sabachthani" I had to pause my iPod and DEAL with that. Get it. Enjoy it.