Syracuse Athletics and Jim Boeheim have agreed to a contract extension that makes him the head coach past the 2017-18 season, the school announced Sunday evening.

This news comes after long-time SU assistant Mike Hopkins accepted the vacant head coaching position at the University of Washington on Sunday morning.

Current Syracuse assistant Adrian Autry has been named associate head coach.

The press release reads:

The extension of the veteran coach's contract came about as head-coach-in-waiting Mike Hopkins was hired to lead the program at Washington. Syracuse moved promptly to maintain stability in its program by negotiating the new deal with Boeheim, who had planned to step down following the conclusion of the next season. "Mike accepting the position at Washington has put us in a unique position," said John Wildhack, Syracuse Director of Athletics. "The circumstances are different now than they were when he was named head-coach-in-waiting. "After discussing it with Chancellor Syverud, we believe the best decision for the student-athletes currently in the program and those who are committed to attending the University is to extend Coach Boeheim's contract. Jim has enthusiastically agreed. "Mike received a great opportunity and we thank him and wish him the best," said Boeheim. "I'm happy to stay on to help the program and to continue the staff's devotion to success." "The Syracuse basketball program was built on the concept of family and that remains intact with Coach Boeheim agreeing to this contract extension," said John Wildhack. "Having experienced assistant coaches like Adrian Autry and Gerry McNamara on the staff helps us maintain the elite standing the program has earned."

This is the right move for all intents and purposes. It helps stabilize what could’ve been a troublesome offseason, it helps on the recruiting trail and it gives SU power when hiring another assistant coach.

Boeheim just completed his 41st season as head coach of the Orange. He enrolled at Syracuse in 1962 as a walk-on on the basketball team.

Boeheim has guided the Orange into the postseason 39 times during his tenure, including 32 NCAA Tournaments and seven NIT berths. Boeheim has coached Syracuse into the NCAA championship game three times and the Final Four five times. The Orange won the national championship in 2003.