Today’s recipe is for Sims 4 Super Chocolate Tummers Bomb Cupcakes. These tasty little cupcakes can be made from the Cupcake Machine in The Sims 4 at level 7 cooking. The cupcake machine is a nice little addition to The Sims 4 and allows you to make all sorts of tasty treats for your Sims (and as of the Get to Work Expansion, you can make more than just cupcakes in it!)

Holy plumbob you guys. I figured with a name like “Super Chocolate Tummers Bomb” that I needed to go way overboard on the chocolate with this recipe. And that is just what I did. Chocolate cupcakes filled with chocolate chips, nutella buttercream frosting, and MORE chocolate chips on top. These things are DELICIOUS. My good friend Val (aka 8bitmom) visited when I made these, so she and her son helped taste test this recipe. It was a hit all around.

Coming up with a nutella buttercream frosting was a fun experiment. Nutella is delicious on its own, but making it into a frosting and putting it on a cupcake just ups the deliciousness by a hundredfold. Be prepared for chocolate overload with this recipe.

So, without further ado… I give you, the Super Chocolate Tummers Bomb recipe!

Sims 4 Super Chocolate Tummers Bomb Cupcakes Sims 4 Super Chocolate Tummers Bomb Cupcakes made in real life. For the cupcakes: 1.25 cups all-purpose flour

1/4 tsp baking soda

2 tsp baking powder

1 cup cocoa powder

1 pinch salt

3 Tbsp canola oil

1.25 cups sugar

2 eggs

1 tsp vanilla extract For the Nutella Buttercream Frosting: 1 cup unsalted butter, softened

1.5 cups powdered sugar

3/4 cups Nutella For the cupcakes: Preheat oven to 350°F Combine all dry ingredients (up to salt) in a medium sized bowl In a separate bowl combine all wet ingredients and mix well Add the wet ingredients to the dry ingredients and use a hand mixer to mix until thoroughly combined and no lumps remain Slowly stir (do not use the hand mixer for this) in the 1/2 cup of chocolate chips Add mixture to a paper cupcake liner lined baking sheet Bake for 20 to 25 minutes, use a toothpick to check for doneness, if the toothpick comes out of the cupcake clean then the cupcakes are done, if not put them back in for an additional 5 minutes Once done, let cupcakes cool completely (at least 1 hour) For the Nutella Buttercream Frosting: Add all ingredients to a hand or stand mixer and mix (starting at the slowest speed and gradually increasing to about speed 5 once the sugar has been combined) Mix until everything is thoroughly combined

The Sims 4 Cupcake Machine makes several different cupcake recipes. I’m hoping to make a few others at some point, particularly The Baconing. Because bacon on a cupcake… oh yes.

If you think this recipe looks familiar, it is because The Sims official website featured it! You can check out their post for my Super Chocolate Tummers Bomb Cupcakes here.