Britain could face a 'divorce' bill of up to 20 billion euros - around £18 billion - as the cost of leaving the EU.

The massive payment is expected to be demanded by Brussels to settle shared liabilities.

Eurocrats are preparing calculations for the sums that need to be divided up as the UK entangles itself from the bloc.

They are believed to include £217 billion of unpaid budget appropriations, £57.5billion of pension liabilities, and other commitments totalling around £29 billion.

Jean Claude Juncker is the president of the European Commission, which handles most of the bloc's spending commitments

The Financial Times said its analysis represented the first attempt to calculate the UK's liabilities on leaving the EU.

Some officials in Brussels have warned that the final figure could be even higher.

A government spokesman refused to said: 'As the Prime Minister has said, we will invoke Article 50 no later than the end of March next year. We are not going to provide a running commentary on leaving the EU.'

The disclosure may cause further jitters on foreign exchange markets following a tumultuous day for the pound.

At one point on Wednesday sterling lost almost 1 per cent of its value against the dollar during the course of exchanges in the Commons, before staging a rally.

There is also a furious backlash under way after Unilever apparently tried to hike prices of popular products including Marmite and Persil in response to the slump in Sterling. Supermarket Tesco has refused the demand, with the firm seemingly refusing to supply the goods.

Theresa May is continuing her mini-tour of European capitals ahead of the EU summit later this month with talks in Madrid with Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy.

Boris Johnson makes his first appearance before the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee since becoming Foreign Secretary.

The Prime Minister faced anger from Tory rebels in the House of Commons yesterday after flatly refusing to give MPs a vote before she triggers Article 50 - the formal process for leaving the EU.

In heated exchanges, Mrs May told one pro-Brussels member: ‘We are siding with the British people, who voted to leave the European Union.

'It is high time MPs listened to the vote of the British people and accepted that that is exactly what we are going to do.’

Mrs May was backed by Brexit Secretary David Davis, who accused bosses, banks and EU leaders of indulging in a ‘Blame Brexit Festival’.