UN Security Council to hold emergency meeting on Yemen after mosque bomb attacks: diplomats

Updated

The United Nations Security Council will hold an emergency meeting today to discuss violence-wracked Yemen, diplomats say.

The talks follow several suicide bombings at Shiite Huthi mosques in the capital Sanaa on Friday, claimed by the Sunni Islamic State (IS) group, which killed 142 people.

Discussions will take place at the request of embattled Yemeni president Abedrabbo Mansour Hadi who has accused the Iranian-allied Huthi militia, that controls Sanaa, of staging a coup against him.

In a letter on Friday addressed to the Security Council, Mr Hadi denounced "the criminal acts of the Huthi militias and their allies".

He said they "not only threaten peace in Yemen but the regional and international peace and security".

"I urge for your urgent intervention in all available means to stop this aggression that is aimed at undermining the legitimate authority, the fragmentation of Yemen and its peace and stability," Mr Hadi wrote.

The meeting will allow the envoys of the 15 member countries to hear an update of the situation on the ground, likely to be made by UN special adviser Jamal Benomar, who has tried to mediate the conflict for several months.

Representatives from Yemen and Qatar will also speak before the council meets behind closed doors.

Diplomats said the council may adopt a declaration but not a resolution, which would be too difficult to negotiate in several hours.

On Sunday, the Huthi militia and its allies seized an airport in the strategic south-western city of Taez from forces loyal to Mr Hadi, security sources said.

Meanwhile, the United States has evacuated its remaining personnel, including about 100 special operations forces, from Yemen because of the deteriorating security situation there, US officials said on Saturday.

By claiming its first attack in Yemen, IS has sought to exploit the chaos gripping the country where rival Al Qaeda has traditionally been the dominant militant movement.

Yemen has been hurtling towards civil war since last year when the Huthis seized Sanaa and advanced into Sunni areas, leading to clashes with local tribes and energising a southern separatist movement.

AFP

Topics: terrorism, world-politics, unrest-conflict-and-war, government-and-politics, yemen, united-states

First posted