Eurostat, the European statistics agency, raised its estimate of the country’s budget deficit for last year to 13.6 percent of gross domestic product, above the Greek government’s recent estimate of 12.9 percent. The ratio of debt to G.D.P. stood at 115.1 percent, compared with the government’s estimate of 113.4 percent.

Eurostat also expressed “a reservation on the quality of the data reported by Greece” because of “uncertainties on the surplus of social security funds for 2009, on the classification of some public entities and on the recording of off-market swaps.”

That suggested that the agency could increase its estimates even higher — by 0.3 to 0.5 percentage point for the deficit, and by five to seven percentage points for debt-to-G.D.P. measure.

Separately, Moody’s cut its rating for Greece to A3 from A2 and placed the country on review for further downgrades in view of the “significant risk that debt may only stabilize at a higher and more costly level than previously estimated.” The lower rating still remains an investment grade.

In a statement, Sarah Carlson, Moody’s lead analyst for Greece, said it was “unlikely that the rating will remain at A3, unless the government’s actions can restore confidence in the markets and counteract the prevailing headwinds of high interest rates and low growth.”

The stream of news pushed the yields on Greek bonds up to new highs — to 8.835 percent, above the 8.529 percent return that investors currently demand for similar debt from South Africa.

Photo

The euro slid in early Asian trading on Friday to $1.3201 against the dollar, the lowest level in a year. On Thursday in Europe, it dropped to $1.3316, down from $1.3401 on Wednesday. Shares in Athens also tumbled again on Thursday, with the benchmark index closing almost 4 percent lower, taking its losses for the year so far to more than 15 percent.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Officials in Athens and Brussels sought to limit the damage.

The Greek Finance Ministry said in a statement that the announcement by Eurostat did not alter its goal of reducing the deficit by at least four percentage points of G.D.P. in 2010, as laid down in the Greek stability and growth program, which it forwarded to the European Commission for scrutiny.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“The government has already adopted all the necessary measures — in excess of 6 percent of G.D.P. — to ensure the achievement of this objective and is rapidly progressing on the implementation of all policy and structural changes,” it said.

Analysts expressed concern that the increased debt and deficit forecasts could spread the economic pain further into the future.

Greece’s planned fiscal consolidation over the coming two years would already be an unprecedented adjustment over such a short period, said Mr. Kounis, at Fortis. He added that “it would not end there.” Greece will now need to tighten more to get its debt down, as planned, to 60 percent of G.D.P. by 2020.

“Not only do additional loans look necessary next year but longer-term loans may eventually need to be made available on more generous terms,” he said.

The difficulties in getting an international aid package worth an estimated 45 billion euros ($60 billion); the unpopularity of the bailout in many countries; and a potential challenge to the package in Germany’s constitutional court suggest that the provision of additional help will not be straightforward.

The strike Thursday in Athens disrupted public services, shutting down schools and leaving state hospitals working with emergency staff, The Associated Press reported.

Demonstrators from a trade union continued to blockade Piraeus, the main port serving Athens, disrupting ferry services. But airports remained open, The A.P. reported. Unions fear deeper cuts after the Socialist government began talks this week with the I.M.F., the European Central Bank and the European Commission for the three-year rescue package.

As those talks continue in Athens, Greek officials have been quoted in recent days as suggesting that the government may seek to tap funds, if possible, even before the discussion are completed, within two weeks or so.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Eurostat figures also highlighted the troubled state of government finances across the European Union.

The agency raised its estimate of the 2009 deficit for Ireland, to 14.3 percent, compared with the 11.7 percent figure submitted by Dublin in December.

The Spanish deficit for 2009 was projected to be in line with estimates earlier this year, at 11.2 percent of G.D.P., while the forecast for Portugal’s deficit was 9.4 percent.