At the 5th Global Conference on Cyberspace, Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched UMANG (Unified Mobile Application For New-age Governance) app in an aim to bring e-governance on a unified platform, making it accessible to all citizens to access myriad e-gov services with ease.

It has seamless integration with customer centric services such as Aadhaar, DigiLocker, Rapid Assessment System and Bharat Bill Payment System. It is launched with the provisions of 43 government departments that grants access to 150+ services and is targeted to reach 200 departments granting access to 1200+ services by December 2019.

It was announced last year by the PMO as a part of the Digital India initiative by Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and is aimed to address this issue of multiplicity.

It features like transaction records to help the user in case of any conflict, setting users’ preferences for frequently accessed services, shortcuts and languages. It has support for 12 regional languages in addition to English and has been designed to offer access to the pan India e-government services from the Central, State, Local Bodies, and Agencies of government on app, web, SMS, and IVR channels.

The app supports major services like EPFO, PAN, NPS, CBSE, Bharat Gas, DigiLocker, Passport, GST, HP, Bharat & Indane Gas, e Pathshala, Income Tax, Digi Sevak, Crop Insurance and more. If you have linked your Aadhar card to the app, you can effectively pay taxes, apply for or renew their passports, book gas, insure crops, access & alter pension account details, access e-books, and even check CBSE exam results.

You can also give a missed call on 97183-97183 to get the app download link on your number or download it from the links below.

Download UMANG – Android | iPhone | Windows Phone

Speaking at the event, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, said:

Today, we launched the UMANG Mobile App, which will provide over a hundred citizen-centric services. At the back-end, these services will be catered for by many different departments of the Union and State Governments. This integrated approach will add an automatic layer of “peer performance pressure”, in the working of these departments.



