I was in the market for a premium gaming mouse with some macro functionality. My goal was to get something that was high end, allowed me more comfort during play, and was highly responsive. Unfortunately before even getting a chance to put any of these lofty goals to the test, the Naga Hex V2 unfortunately failed even the most basic functions of a $5.99 bargain bin mouse. Here were some MAJOR flaws with the Naga Hex V2: 1) Razer Synapse. It is inherently flawed and buggy. The concept seems at first logical: upload your button map profiles to the cloud and sync to all of your devices. However, spotty connectivity meant that more often than not a default map was loaded, the wrong map was loaded or the mouse just had completely unpredictable functioning each time it was unplugged or the computer restarted. NOT a good start. 2) Sensor issues. After returning for a replacement mouse I found that something is seriously wrong with the laser or driver on this mouse. The cursor would freeze every 5-10 seconds in an unpredictable fashion. After following all tech support requests they agreed to replace under warranty. 3) Ergonomics. I actually was surprised that the mouse isn't held like any mouse that I had encountered before, but this was little advertised. Your pinky digit sort of needs to float off by itself. Sure this might be common knowledge to mouse experts but it is another factor that contributes to the learning curve of the mouse. 4. Poor creativity with Chroma. The most useless but cool function of the mouse is the LED lights. However, the options are extremely limited. It also failed to sync properly with other Chroma devices and again I will blame Synapse. 5. Calibration tool. It is completely broken. When trying to select a Firefly mousepad to calibrate with, the program would crash. HOW is this possible that all of this buggy software is allowed by Razer without fixes? OVERALL - this mouse is major investment risk and I would absolutely not recommend it. Synapse is the worst concept executed in the absolute worst way. I wanted to buy in to how cool all of the lights and cloud services could integrate but after this purchase I am never buying a Razer product again.

Read more