Meet Tim Draper, one of our earliest investors

Nucleus Vision Blocked Unblock Follow Following Dec 5, 2017

We recently published an article that gave you a glimpse into our early-backers, institutional investors and advisory board members

Among all our investors & advisors, there is one who deserves a special vote of thanks: our very first backer, the legendary venture capital veteran Tim Draper.

When it comes to venture capital, Tim Draper needs no introduction. His successful investments in Skype, Hotmail and, most famously, 2014’s USD $19 million investment in Bitcoin make him a household name. In 1985, Tim founded the firm that would become Draper Fisher Jurvetson (DFJ); he is also the founder of Draper Associates and Draper University. Tim was the very first investor to back our vision, propelling us on our journey to bring NUCLEUS technology to life.

Venture capitalists in Silicon Valley are known for taking extremely calculated risks on opportunities that can result in potentially outsized returns, and when you look at Tim Draper’s portfolio, you will see exactly what we’re talking about. Hotmail and Skype were two of the first communication applications built for the internet. While the rest of the world had no indication that these would be good investments at the time, Tim Draper could clearly foresee how these services would grow dramatically in the future, and chose to back them. The rest as they say, is history.

Think about Tesla — a company that challenged the status quo of the entire oil & gas and automobile industries. In hindsight, most people would consider Tesla as one of the greatest investments of all time, but back in its formative days, the entire industry was unsure of this now revolutionary company. It was Tim Draper who saw into the future and chose to take the unlikely bet, giving Tesla the much needed financial support.

Baidu, Twitter, Box, Coinbase, Solar City, Angel List, Twilio — the list of Tim’s investments is endless. Our grand vision at NUCLEUS VISION is equally disruptive we are proud to join a family of household names, names everyone might consider smart bets today. We, at NUCLEUS are challenging the status quo of several industries, and it is with the backing and belief of an investor such as Tim who gave us the confidence in our mission and vision that we are where we find ourselves today.

Apart from his stellar successes in various ventures, Tim Draper’s work with blockchain and cryptocurrencies has been equally extraordinary. Tim often says that the businesses that most interest him are the ones that solve problems where existing solutions currently charge customers a lot, while delivering very low value. NUCLEUS provides tremendous value to every player involved in the platform at the fraction of the cost of existing solutions, which was one of our key selling points to Tim.

Capital to Change the World

Raising capital is of course the most obvious benefit to finding new investors, but one far more exciting aspect has been to find investors who are just as interested in changing the status quo as we are. In Tim Draper, we found a collaborator and mentor, someone who is passionate about disruption and wants to help us change the world.

In the upcoming token sale, we hope to find others like us who are interested in the disruptive, revolutionary potential of NUCLEUS VISION. Join us in our efforts to radically change industries with innovative IoT technology with real-world impact.

Stay Tuned for more updates from NUCLEUS Sign up for our Token-Sale at NUCLEUS VISION.

Disclaimer: This is not an investment advice. Please do your own research before investing in any avenue. The information contained in this post is for informational purposes only. You should take independent advice from a professional or independently research and verify, any information that you find in this post and wish to rely on, for the purpose of making any decision. Through this post you may be able to link to other websites which are not under the control of Nucleus Vision. We have no control on the nature, content and activity on those sites. The inclusion of any links does not imply a recommendation or endorsement of the other website, its products or views.

To stay updated on our company updates and announcements, follow us on: Twitter |Telegram | Medium |Linkedin |Facebook |