Republican presidential candidate, Donald Trump holds a plane-side rally in a hanger at Youngstown-Warren Regional Airport in Vienna, Ohio, Monday, March 14, 2016. | AP Photo Trump: Senate should block Obama's Supreme Court nominee

President Barack Obama plans to announce his Supreme Court nominee on Wednesday, but Donald Trump thinks the Senate shouldn’t give the pick a hearing.

“I don’t think so, no I think they should do what they’re doing,” the front-runner for the Republican presidential nomination said on “Good Morning America” Wednesday. “I think they should wait until the next president and let the next president pick.”

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) have vowed not to give Obama's choice a hearing, let alone an up-or-down vote. Democrats and Republicans are gearing up instead for an intense political battle aimed at motivating their respective bases, with an eye toward key Senate races that could swing the balance of the upper chamber in the fall.

Trump repeated his position later on CNN’s “New Day,” saying that he wasn’t “in favor of going forward.”

Host Chris Cuomo then asked: What if Obama picked your sister?

“Then I would say the same thing,” said Trump, whose sister, Maryanne Trump Barry, is a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit who was nominated by President Bill Clinton.

In matters of the court as in all else, Trump's likely nomination has divided Republicans — many of whom fear a political wipeout in November if he is indeed their party's standard-bearer. Some conservatives argue that a President Trump could not be trusted with such a sensitive life-time appointment, while others counter that his choice would be better anyone Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton is likely to name.

As for Trump, he has promised to choose a conservative along the lines of the late Justice Antonin Scalia.

Someone like Scalia "would be my ideal," Trump told radio host Hugh Hewitt recently, noting that he had mentioned two names — Bill Pryor, who currently serves on the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, and Diane Sykes, a judge on the Seventh Circuit — as possible replacements.

But, he said, "the ideal would be Scalia reincarnated."