Rated 5 out of 5 by Asiandoc from Excellent veggie knife This was the first shun knife I purchased. I wanted to replace a Nakiri I purchased 40 plus years ago. The first knife I received had domes pits in the blade surface and a cup in the cutting edge. I returned it stating damage. WS immediately sent me a replacement in perfect condition. I am very pleased with this knife. It is very sharp, cuts fine perfect slices effortlessly. Since purchasing this knife I have replaced my knife set with shin Fuji style knives.

Rated 5 out of 5 by CulinaryCailliers from Great for Vegetables We purchased 9 different Shun knives and have been satisfied with all of them. Shun makes a care kit for their knives (WS sells it) and it extends the lives of the knives. WS will sharpen them for you but you can send them to Shun and they will sharpen for free and do any repair work if needed. This knife does very well for vegetables and small chopping.

Rated 5 out of 5 by Cookaholic from Love the feel of this knife! I have used this knife for about a month now and feel that it is the perfect size for my smallish hands. (I'm a 5'2" female). Handle fits well in my hand. Great for prepping vegetables! I'm training myself to use the up and down motion instead of the rocking motion that I use with a western style chef's knife. My Hinoki boards- I have a small, medium and large-are perfect to use with Asian knives in order to avoid chipping or blunting edges. I believe a softer wood cutting board is essential to keeping really sharp edges on my Asian blades. This Nakiri was a great addition to my collection of knives!

Rated 5 out of 5 by tnevin from She loves it Says it's the best thing since sliced bread (pardon the pun). Incredible sharp.

Rated 5 out of 5 by sueyue from Beautiful Blade Having been using a western Santoku knife, I decided that I'd like to try a Japanese blade for more precise cuts. I wanted an all round knife that could perform general cutting functions. And although I do rock my knife sometimes, the push cutting of this blade works well with how I prep. The blade is thin and sharp. Although this is a very basic line for Shun, it has a beautiful wavy pattern on the body of the blade and the edge has a mirror finish. The handle has a typical D shaped curvature and likely biased towards right handers. The weight is light, the blade glides through most vegetable and meats and it is extremely sharp. I like the angles of eastern blades much more than western. It is a very versatile knife if you do not do a lot of rocking motion cutting. I like that the blade is a comfortable length for a small handed cook. I highly recommend this blade for general kitchen use. It serves my purposes and the way I like to use a knife in my kitchen.

Rated 5 out of 5 by Marko1 from Best Veggie Knife I have alway been a fan of Shun knives for their quality and design and this knife does not disappoint. Very sharp blade that food does not stick to due to its design. Feels great in the hand and that feeling translates into control of your knife. Fantastic for prepping vegetables and chopping.

Rated 1 out of 5 by GaylynnS from Dissapointing This is my second knife and again it has little nicks on the blade. I treasured my first one, washed it by hand and when it had several chips I thought it had to have been my husband or boys . My second one I washed by hand and hid it in a special spot so it would remain perfect....but, it happened to this one too. Very dissapointing.