Alice Ruling Kills Another Patent Dead, As Lumen View Patent Troll Drops Appeal

from the making-it-easy dept

Appellant Lumen View Technology, LLC respectfully moves to dismiss voluntarily the appeal under Fed. Cir. R. 42(b). The United States Supreme Court in Alice Corporation Pty. Ltd. v. CLS Bank International, 573 U. S. ____ (2014) (No. 13-298), has provided greater clarity on patentability in light of 35 U.S. C. ยง101. The parties respectfully make a request for dismissal as an efficient resolution of the instant appeal and to conserve judicial resources.

We recently noted that a bunch of courts had been killing off bad software patents thanks to the Supreme Court's ruling in Alice v. CLS Bank. And now, that ruling is even leading the trolls themselves to give up. Notorious patent troll Lumen View recently dropped its appeal in its case against the website FindTheBest, saying that the ruling in Alice made it clear it wouldn't win:If you don't recall, Lumen View holds a patent (US Patent 8,069,073 ) (now officially and finally decided as invalid) for a "system and method for facilitating bilateral and multilateral decision making." Don't ask what that means because it doesn't mean much. Even before the Alice ruling, the district court had said the patent was invalid as merely being an "abstract idea" and thus unpatentable subject matter.Throughout the case, Lumen View (and its lawyers) had done some astounding things, including claiming that FindTheBest's CEO committed a hate crime for calling Lumen View a patent troll. Lumen View's lawyers later sought a gag order against FindTheBest's Kevin O'Connor, demanding that he remove from the internet his discussions about Lumen View and his willingness to fight back against the troll rather than give in.For a company like that to finally give up -- before the appeal was even heard -- shows just how powerful that ruling in Alice is. The legal fight is not totally over. FindTheBest is still arguing that Lumen View is guilty of racketeering (which is unlikely to go anywhere), and the two sides are still fighting over Lumen View having to pay FindTheBest's legal fees -- but the main event is now concluded, and the patent is officially and totally invalid.

Filed Under: kevin o'connor, obviousness, patents

Companies: alice, cls bank, findthebest, lumen view