Fantasy Premier League Clean Sheet Tips For Gameweek 18

Welcome back to another article highlighting Fantasy Premier League Cleans Sheet Tips for Gameweek 18. This week NaturalFootyFan picks out clubs with the best cleansheet potential and also the personnel to fit.

When competing in Fantasy Football contests on any site, securing cleansheet points from your players can be just as pivotal as your forwards getting on the scoresheet. In this column, you can make use of a selection of statistics, an analysis of the bookies odds and of course our expert advice!

Bookies Odds

The first thing you should note down when trying to gauge cleansheet potential is the Bookies odds. They provide unbiased statistics, which in turn helps you make the right decision, with the highest chance of succeeding, instead of being swayed by personal opinion. To save you the time and effort of searching far and wide for a reliable source, we have created a simplified chart for Gameweek 18.

[table id=38 /]

We strongly advise focussing on the teams situated in the top half of the table when finalising your FPL, Mondogoal and FantasyBet selections. Below we have some strategy-based ideas and also recommended players; based upon the unique scoring system on each site.

Goalkeeper Selection

FPL Tip – Hugo Lloris (5.1m) vs. Norwich (H) 6.4 % Ownership

The reason why Lloris is such an attractive option for FPL is his tendancy to pick up bonus points. The 28-year-old who is captain for club and country, is without doubt one of the best goalkeepers in the Premier League and his acrobatic save style definitely catches the eye; with 2 bonus points in his last outing he topped the GK chart with 9 points. Tottenham have lost just one of their last 16 Premier League matches (W7 D8 L1) and their recent form is top notch, as our chart highlights. Spurs are unbeaten in their previous 19 meetings against newly promoted sides and to further reinforce their confidence Norwich have never won a Premier League match on boxing day (W0 D1 L4). Alex Neil will have to clamp down on his player’s Christmas day celebrations if they are to have any chance.

Mondogoal Tip – Lukasz Fabianski (5.2m) vs. West Brom (H)

Swansea’s dire form, which sees them lingering in the relegation zone, has had a dramatic effect on Fabianski’s value. Last seasons top scoring keeper and formerly peaking in the premium bracket (7-9m), during the early months of the season, Fabianski’s price has been hacked at each week and now he is listed on page 3 of 3 on the goalkeeper list, which is never a good thing! A depressing sight for the Polish International, who often witnesses his defence parting in front of him, nevertheless, he offers unbelievable value in Gameweek 18. West Brom have picked up more points on the road this season, but as a Tony Pulis side (especially with Rondon suspended), their chief principle will be defensive solidarity. This plays right into Fabianski owners’ hands, Swansea will probe with more intent than their visitors, but they will also be keen to build from their cleansheet of last week. Mondogoal offer 3 points for a single-goal match and 6 for a cleansheet; so at this price, although we think a cleansheet is more likely, 3 points would not be the end of the world and could free up some cash to spend elsewhere.

FantasyBet Tip – Joe Hart (5.5m) vs. Sunderland (H)

With less variable price brackets than, for example, Mondogoal on FantasyBet it is well worth your buck to splash the cash on the most expensive keeper, especially with his 53% chance of a cleansheet. If Pellegrini’s side concede a goal, it’ll be their longest run without a cleansheet at home since October 1991 (13 matches), so they definitely have an incentive. Man City welcome Sunderland – a side that have won only 2 of their last 10 boxing day fixtures (D4 L4). We can see nothing other than a cleansheet for Man City and that’s exactly what’s needed with FantasyBet’s rigid scoring system, where no points are awarded for a single-goal match.

Mondogoal Defensive Blocks

It’s a regular sight, especially in the largest GPP contests, to see leaders sporting a lineup packed with defenders from the same team. We are the first to state that this is a risky strategy, but if the team you have backed come up trumps, you will fly up the leaderboard. A large amount of prize winners in the fiercely contested £10,000 shootout, which sees 1st place bag £2000, go for this defensive block strategy. We are going to take you through the strengths and weaknesses of 3 different backline blocks for Gameweek 18. As you will notice we advise going for 3 at the back; it has proved the most profitable in the past and is the number 1 choice of the majority of Mondogoal managers.

Low Risk – Manchester City Block vs. Sunderland (Total Expense: 25.9m)

This is a very expensive block, which chips out over a quarter of your total budget. However, if you are willing to spend heavy in an attempt to bank a cleansheet (53% chance implied), then this is the best combination around. Vincent Kompany returns from injury and should slot back into the starting XI alongside Otamendi; who has looked a shadow of himself in Kompany’s absence. To complete the back 3 is Aleksandar Kolarov, he offers a fantastic offensive outlet, the left-back takes his share of freekicks and has contributed with 2 goals this season.

Medium Risk – Swansea Block vs. West Brom (Total Expense: 22.5m)

Swansea were involved in a goal-less stalemate vs. West Ham in Gameweek 17 and their defence scored very well on Mondogoal. With their patient build-up play from the back, Swansea’s defenders always rack up a large amount of passing points (0.03 points awarded for every successful pass on Mondogoal). Neil Taylor has played every minute of Premier League action this season and with his fellow full-back Kyle Naughton, they frequently whip dangerous balls into the area. With Gomis and Ayew waiting to pounce in the centre, an assist seems likely. Williams also provides an aerial threat at set-piece situations. Swansea are ranked 4th in our chart and have a 45% implied chance for a cleansheet.

High Risk – Aston Villa Block vs. West Ham (Total Expense: 18.9m)

In search of a backline that is a bit lighter on the budget? Then Aston Villa, although unpredictable, could be your best option. They welcome West Ham to Villa Park, in a matchup where goals have come at a premium in the past with both sides failing to score in three of their last 4 meetings. Another positive for this budget block is the fact that West Ham have drawn their last 3 Premier League matches 0-0. More of the same would be perfect and even better a Lescott bullet header from a Bacuna freekick!

Thanks for reading and let us know if you enjoyed this article in the comments below.

Good Luck from all at fplbet.