It seems that no tree is safe from lawyers driving late at night in East Dallas.

Earlier this summer, Texas Rep. Victoria Neave ran into a tree on Abrams for which she received a DWI. Unfortunately, she is not the only lawyer to take on our timber this summer. The Dallas Morning News reports that Assistant District Attorney Leah Lucius was accused of drunken driving after hitting a tree less than a mile from her Forest Hills house last night. According to the affidavit, her Cadillac was found around 12:30 a.m. in the 1600 block of Breezewood Lane, near the intersection with San Leandro Drive.

The parallels don’t end there. When Neave was arrested, she proclaimed, “I love you and I will fight for you and I’m invoking my fifth Amendment rights,” according to the police report. Lucius had a unique defense of her actions as well. According to the affidavit, she told officers, “Give me a break. We are Facebook friends.”

She refused to undergo a field sobriety test, but did hand officers her concealed handgun license when they asked for her driver’s license.

Lucius told officers she had a couple glasses of wine, and that she only swerved to avoid another car that came into her lane. A neighbor made the call when he heard a loud crash and saw the Cadillac flying through the air after it hit a tree.

Lucius hit a stop sign, went into the front yard of the house at the corner of San Leandro and Breezewood, but wasn’t close to done. The car clipped a tree, veered back onto the street and back into the side yard before it crashed through the alley and into another neighbor’s gate, knocking it out of place. The damage spanned half a block, according to the homeowners.

Lucius has been suspended from her job while the investigation is ongoing, but was not booked into the Dallas County Jail. She was taken to the hospital for evaluation and to have her blood alcohol content tested.

While the tree Neave plowed into now has its own Twitter handle, Lucius’ tree has yet to make an appearance on social media.