A creamy velvety cheesecake topped with ruby red cranberry sauce. A festive holiday treat perfect for the Thanksgiving or Christmas dessert table.

Did you know today is World Diabetes Day? I didn’t either and if you take a look at my blog you can easily understand why. I bake absolutely nothing that can be called diabetic friendly, well except for these Pumpkin Cookies I made last year for my friend Carolyn and this beautiful Cranberry Cheesecake which happens to be both sugar and gluten free.

I’ve been reading Carolyn’s blog since I started blogging and I’ve learned that even if you have diabetes you can still enjoy lots of sweet treats, oh, and she’s a professional when it comes to whipping a low-carb gluten free sweet treat.

When she emailed me a few weeks ago about participating in an event to raise Diabetes awareness my first thought went to my mother in law. Some of you might smile of this point but I’ve mention her before and she’s as sweet as sugar, the sad part being she has to watch her blood sugar.

And just like Carolyn, my mother in law loves sweets. She has to has some every day, even if it’s just a few crumbs.

This cheesecake recipe is my favorite. I have made it several types using regular sugar and every time I just change the sauce on top, it depends on my mood and the season. This time I picked cranberries since they are in season, but you can leave it plain if you prefer.

Instead of regular white sugar I used Swerve, an all-natural diabetic friendly sweetener. It was the first time I have used it and it was a wonderful experience.

It was the first time I also made cranberry sauce for the cheesecake and can’t say for sure if it was the sweetener or just in general, but it dried out a wee bit. I’d recommend topping the cheesecake with the cranberry sauce just before serving, this way you prevent it from drying out.

The cheesecake turned out creamy and velvety, just like I like it. As a variation (and I’ve made it several times as well) you can replace one package of cream cheese with 1 cup of cottage cheese)