News

DRAGONFORCE REVEAL DETAILS OF NEW ALBUM

London based metal superstars DRAGONFORCE have revealed details of their forthcoming new album. Entitled “The Power Within”, the ten track monster is the bands fifth studio album, and first with new singer Marc Hudson in the fold.

DragonForce guitarist Herman Li said,

“The last two years have been the most fun we ever had making an album. Through writing, jamming and touring together, we have built this incredible energy and it has been fully captured on the new album.

This time around we’ve really brought our metal side to the surface and made some of the best music of our career. From the fastest song we’ve ever recorded to the slower songs, and some things you would never expect from us, this is by far the most diverse DragonForce album yet.”

“The Power Within” will be released on April 15th 2012 via the band’s own Electric Generation Recordings, distributed by Essential Music (UK), Roadrunner Records (North America), 3Wise (Australia) and JVC Victor (Japan).

Li added, “This is an exciting new era for DragonForce with Marc joining the band, so we figured this was an ideal time to take full control of our own destiny and establish our own record label for Europe. It’s all hands on deck running it, but a great buzz!”

The full tracklisting is as follows:

THE POWER WITHIN

1. Holding On

2. Fallen World

3. Cry Thunder

4. Give Me the Night

5. Wings of Liberty

6. Seasons

7. Heart of the Storm

8. Die By the Sword

9. Last Man Stands

10. Seasons (Acoustic Version)

There will also be a Digital & Vinyl Version featuring Bonus Tracks “Cry Thunder (Live Rehearsal)”, “Heart of the Storm (Alternative Chorus Version)” and “Avant La Tempête (Instrumental)”, plus an exclusive box set featuring:

CD Version

Access Code for Bonus Material plus

DragonForce Flag,

DF Flashlight/Bottle Opener,

Set of 6 DF Beer Mats featuring band cartoons by Frederic Leclercq.

A small number of very lucky fans will have their first chance to hear new songs from the album at an exclusive sold out show at London’s 100 Club on February 16th 2012.