The sneaky, dishonest way Gov. Bobby Jindal and the Legislature shoveled an extra $30,000 in annual retirement benefits to the head of the Louisiana State Police should forever prevent Jindal from bragging about having cleaned up his state's politics.

It won't, but the events that resulted in an illegal retirement boost for Col. Mike Edmonson - Jindal's appointed police chief - suggests that Louisiana politics remains a cesspool of cronyism.

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal speaks during The Family Leadership Summit, Saturday, Aug. 9, 2014, in Ames, Iowa.

In the closing hours of the 2014 legislative session, legislators passed legislation with an amendment granting Edmonson and another state trooper - both enrolled in the state's DROP retirement plan, but still working and earning full salaries - additional retirement benefits.

Of course, the amendment didn't mention Edmonson or anyone else by name. That fact didn't give legislators pause. They passed the bill without the required fiscal impact statement. Only after Jindal's signature did we discover the retirement honey pot and its cost.

Had they asked any questions, legislators might have realized they were giving $300,000 in extra retirement benefits to just two individuals. Actually, they spent much more money than that, as the fiscal analysis (conducted after the bill passed) only assessed the impact of the bill's first five years. Edmonson is 55. He stands to collect the extra money for several decades.

When state Treasurer John Kennedy and the state's news media (including dogged bloggers C.B. Forgotston and Tom Aswell) challenged the propriety of the deal, no one seemed to know where the amendment originated. After first denying authorship, Sen. Neil Riser (R-Columbia), a close Jindal ally, finally acknowledged his role.

Edmonson says that the legislation wasn't his idea, but rather that of his loyal staff. If you are gullible enough to accept that, you might also believe that most charismatic leaders inspire their underlings to agonize over the boss's post-retirement comfort.

Edmonson was finally forced to decline the benefits. But unless the law is repealed or ruled unconstitutional, what's to prevent him from quietly taking the additional money once he's fully retired?

Several legislators pledge to repeal the language while Kennedy and the bloggers have pushed a reluctant State Police Retirement System Board to investigate the sordid affair. The board will hold a hearing about the matter on Sept. 4.

Silent is one person who could have stopped this outrageous misuse of public resources and who, if he cared, would demand an investigation into how this scandal occurred.

You'd think a governor devoted to good government, who was tricked into signing an illegal and unethical bill, would be outraged. But he's not. After all, his close aide Edmonson was the beneficiary of a shady scheme executed by a close legislative ally. Jindal's silence and inaction tell us all we need to know about his willingness to police his own administration.

His so-called ethics reforms, which he called the "gold standard," are really false gold. Among other things, Jindal's 2008 ethics legislation blessed an appalling system of conflicts, codifying a shadowy recusal process for the state's boards and commissions. A true gold standard would demand something stronger, such as requiring board members with financial conflicts to resign or at least disclose the nature of the conflict. Jindal's law requires neither.

Worse, Jindal, who once campaigned against exemptions to the state ethics code, has signed a passel of them over the years. Most recently, he approved legislation to allow former state senator Francis Heitmeier to lobby the Legislature, even though his brother, David, now holds his old Senate seat.

Most egregious, perhaps, is how special interests have purchased access to Jindal and his administration through a foundation created by the state's first lady, the Supriya Jindal Foundation.

Someday soon, when Jindal formally launches his presidential campaign, he'll boast about all the ways he's transformed Louisiana. Among other achievements, he'll claim that he's reformed our education system, supercharged the economy and transformed health care. That's all debatable, at best.

But it's especially absurd - and patently false - for Jindal to claim that he has cleaned up Louisiana politics. Until he sweeps out the corruption in his own cabinet, such assertions should be met with a chorus of catcalls and raucous laughter.

In his 2010 book, "Leadership and Crisis," Jindal bragged about changing Louisiana's ethical culture, asserting, "The real test for leaders, and indeed the real test for all of us, is to answer this question: are my actions designed to help others or help myself? Taking advantage of others, or exploiting powerful positions to enrich ourselves or feed our own appetites, is the opposite of real leadership."

Jindal should reread those words. As for Edmonson, he's probably very familiar with Jindal's book and that passage. After all, the State Police chief's image is prominently featured on the cover, walking alongside his patron and now-protector, Bobby Jindal.

Robert Mann, an author and former U.S. Senate and gubernatorial staffer, holds the Manship Chair in Journalism at the Manship School of Mass Communication at Louisiana State University. Read more from him at his blog, Something Like the Truth. Follow him on Twitter @RTMannJr or email him at bob.mann@outlook.com.