Dear friends of BlackMonkeys.de & Star Wars Mod: Galactic Warfare,

Today we would like to celebrate two things with you! It’s our 4th birthday of blackMonkeys.de, and at the same time we are happy to present our final version of Star Wars Mod: Galactic Warfare. After all the modding, mapping, scripting, gaming, and drinking, it is done! We hope you will enjoy the mod which is a non-profit project operated by fans. Star Wars, its characters, locations, weapons and all associated items are the intellectual property of Lucasfilm. ©2009 Lucasfilm Ltd. & ™ All rights reserved.

This version contains seven maps (“Mos Eisly”, “Bespin”, “Bestine”, “Not A Cave”, “Jundland”, “Jundland Dusk” as well as the new “Anchorhead). There is also a new killstreak called “viper droid”. The Y-Wing and Tie-Bomber are now part of the killstreak “airstrike” (finally!). We have also fixed some bugs of course. With version 1.0 you will also get an installer which makes your life a bit easier (see the video tutorial below).

Thanks to all who supported us over the last years. We are still stunned by the enormous feedback we have received. Around 75,000 downloads and more than 900,000 visitors on our YouTube Channels were our motivation to go on with the mod for such a long time. A lot of your ideas and recommendations are integrated to this final release.

We also like to thank the worldwide CoD Modding Community. It’s so awesome that most of you old scruffy looking nerf herders have participated to this project. Awesome! The Force is strong with you! Hopefully you will enjoy our new version of SWM: Galactic Warfare for the time being.

You can also download the Mod (incl. Serverfiles) here:

We will upload the installer within today too!

If you like to learn more about us and the team of SWM, you are always welcome at blackMonkeys.de. Please don’t hesitate (either in English or German) to use our board if there are any questions or ideas concerning the mod: forum.blackmonkeys.de

May the Force be with you! Modders for Life!

Sincerely,

Your Blackmonkeys and friends!

Video Tutorial for the GW Installer: