Steve Davis is out as co-host of the “Norris & Davis” morning show on WJZ-FM (105.7 The Fan), the veteran sportscaster confirmed Friday afternoon.

Davis, who has been on Baltimore and Washington TV and radio since 1994, joined 105.7 in 2010 after being laid off by WBAL radio in what management there characterized as a cost-cutting move. He had been on WBAL for five years as host of “Sportsline with Steve Davis,” a popular talk show.

Since 2009, Davis has also owned Steve Davis Media Group, which offers corporations and nonprofits video production services and motivational speeches from Davis, according to his LinkedIn page.

The 1988 Boston College graduate came to Baltimore to cover sports for WBFF (Fox 45) in 1994 from KOIN-TV in Portland, Oregon. He joined WBAL radio in 2004. Davis has won a regional Edward R. Murrow award and a National Sports Story of the Year award from the National Sportscasters and Sportswriters Association.

He has been paired in mornings at 105.7 The Fan with Ed Norris, Baltimore's former police commissioner, since July 2010.

CBS Radio, which owns 105.7 The Fan, has been cutting costs across the country in recent months as its parent explores a sale or IPO of the division, according to Media Life magazine. Many of those cuts involve longtime on-air talent. That looks to be the larger picture and could suggest there might be more change to come at 105.7 The Fan.

CAPTION Actor Kevin Spacey has been spotted in Baltimore recently. Scheduled to appear in court Jan. 7 in Nantucket to be arraigned on the indecent assault and battery charges, Spacey could face as many as five years in prison if convicted. Actor Kevin Spacey has been spotted in Baltimore recently. Scheduled to appear in court Jan. 7 in Nantucket to be arraigned on the indecent assault and battery charges, Spacey could face as many as five years in prison if convicted. CAPTION Dirt bike riders were seen zipping down North Monroe Street in West Baltimore and popping wheelies Tuesday while filming a movie scene. Based on a casting call posted to the Maryland Film Office’s website , it appears the “ride scenes” were shot for the feature film “Charm City,” alternately called “12 O’Clock Boys.” The film will reportedly be executive produced by Will Smith and is based on the 2013 documentary “12 O’Clock Boys” directed by Maryland Institute College of Art alum Lotfy Nathan. Dirt bike riders were seen zipping down North Monroe Street in West Baltimore and popping wheelies Tuesday while filming a movie scene. Based on a casting call posted to the Maryland Film Office’s website , it appears the “ride scenes” were shot for the feature film “Charm City,” alternately called “12 O’Clock Boys.” The film will reportedly be executive produced by Will Smith and is based on the 2013 documentary “12 O’Clock Boys” directed by Maryland Institute College of Art alum Lotfy Nathan.

The departure of Davis will trigger other lineup changes starting Monday.

Rob Long will be the new partner of Ed Norris from 6 to 10 a.m., with Bob Haynie replacing him alongside Vinny Cerrato from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.

"Over the past four years I've had the distinct pleasure of being one half of the Vinny and Rob Show with Vinny Cerrato," Long wrote on Facebook Saturday. "Now, it's time for a new challenge. I will co-host Norris and Long In The Morning with Edward T Norris beginning Monday at 6am. "

Jerry Coleman said that he will be on the air 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. weekdays starting Monday as part of a new lineup.

Davis sent the following statement to the Sun in a text message Friday afternoon:

"I'm really proud of the show. We went from ninth in ratings the month before I started to number one within three months. I want to thank our listeners for making us, for much of the last six years, the top ranked show at the station and in morning drive in Baltimore.

"The listeners have been awesome. I especially want to thank Bob Philips and Dave Labrozzi for the opportunity. I had a good conversation with the station and was told it was a financial decision.

"I can't wait to rediscover what it's like to sleep past 3:30 a.m. and get a full night's sleep. I've been doing this 27 years. These things happen. I'm looking forward to exploring some new opportunities I have been working on. I'll keep people updated on Twitter @SteveDavisBmore."

Labrozzi and Philips are 105.7 The Fan and CBS radio executives.

Calls and emails to station management were not returned Friday.