2. The Loadout

YOU NEED a discovery scanner. This is what allows you to see and find the visitor beacons. If you are a cheapass SOB count on having to drop into EVERY nav beacon (do not recommend, as cops and NPC pirates hang around there, and you have to complete a scan of the beacon in order to get the system data)



a discovery scanner. This is what allows you to see and find the visitor beacons. If you are a cheapass SOB count on having to drop into EVERY nav beacon (do not recommend, as cops and NPC pirates hang around there, and you have to complete a scan of the beacon in order to get the system data) Variety of Passenger cabins Missions are very diverse, so have stored cabins you can quicky equip when a lucrative mission pops up



Missions are very diverse, so have stored cabins you can quicky equip when a lucrative mission pops up 6A Shield, or 5 prismatic. Hull damage makes missions fail. So don't let anything get through.



Base A rated thrusters mean nothing can scan you, modded means an extra bit of maneuverability which helps in dodging into the station.



having good jump range will make your life better But it's playable without engineering, just remember to use your discovery scanner to make use of the extra systems you're jumping through



But it's playable without engineering, just remember to use your discovery scanner to make use of the extra systems you're jumping through Shield boosters help you avoid hull damage, which freaks out some passengers - and with that much extra energy there is no reason to not have them

Here's the real trick; versatility!

if you'd think that having passengers in a higher class cabin than required would pad their happiness levels... you would be wrong. :(

Base ship: The Orca.Necessary modules: Adv discovery scanner, passenger cabinsImportant non-functional requirements: speed, best possible shield, jump range, good sensors.The Orca is the best ship for this method of play. A cobra may also work, but the high laying Luxury jobs will not be an optionThe locking down of the mission boards can be used to your advantage. If you see a 10mil mission which requires 7 seats, economy class you can open outfitting, swap out the 6 seat business class cabin module, and then pick up that mission.Luxury cabins in particular are highly situational. I ran a 23mil/ 3 stop mission which required a luxury cabinBUT the incredibly low seat numbers mean keeping them equipped all the time is inefficient.