Let's get to the Philadelphia Eagles links ...

Carson Wentz Tells Us About Quarterbacking In Philly, And What To Order At Wawa - UPROXX

Wawa is great. Turkey, bacon, avocado sandwich is pretty prime. You can’t go wrong with that one.

Reasons to get excited about the Eagles’ Day 3 draft picks - BGN

The Eagles had five picks on the third day of the 2017 NFL Draft. After triple dipping on defense in the first three rounds, it was unsurprising the Eagles followed up with three straight offensive picks and then finished with two defensive players. Despite them being later round picks, these players mostly have things to get excited for and more of these players than not could be role players down the line.

BGN Radio #235: Did The Eagles Help Carson Wentz In The Draft? - BGNRadio.com

Reviewing the Eagles’ 2017 NFL Draft.

Mailbag: What would be your hindsight Eagles mock draft? - PhillyVoice

I think a lot of people are selling Derek Barnett short. As for Allen and Hooker being better overall players, I would agree with Allen. I think he was a “top five” type of talent in this draft, but he was a medical risk. I don't have the Eagles' doctors' reports on him, so I don't know what they know. As such, I'm not in a position to say they should have taken Allen. Obviously, 15 teams other than the Eagles passed on him as well, so the Eagles weren't alone. As for Hooker, I don’t think he’s better than Barnett. Yes, he made a lot of big plays for Ohio State, and that’s appealing, but he was also a horrid tackler. He has a ways to go before he’s an all-around complete safety.

From warehouse to red carpet: the driving force behind Derek Barnett - ESPN

The glitz and glamour of the NFL draft behind her, Christine Barnett began settling back into her routine this week, returning to the same UPS warehouse that she has toiled in for the past 23 years. She had taken some time off to join her son, Derek, in Philadelphia for the draft. Walked the red carpet with him down the historic museum steps. Sat with him as he was selected 14th overall by the Philadelphia Eagles. Watched from a couple rows back as he met with the local media for the first time, using the opportunity to heap praise on her as he often does.

Eagles build tasty roster with a big box of Now and Later - Inquirer

The Eagles emerged from the NFL draft as a team that has chosen two paths to the 2017 season and beyond, one that takes a straight line to improving the roster right away, even if incrementally, and the other that meanders through the woods a bit, with a higher potential reward down the road, but less certainty of success. Whether the team will be competitive this season, and to what extent, is really not that important. It isn't going to win the Super Bowl, and if that is the real, and not just stated, goal, the Eagles have done just enough to create a professional environment for 2017 in which hope can triumph even if the team doesn't all that often. The organization's focus is on a more distant horizon, and given the reality of their division and their own stage of development, that is exactly as it should be.

A look at players Eagles missed from 74-99 after Timmy Jernigan trade - CSN Philly

With Sutton, Tankersley, Lewis and Griffin going off the board a few spots before the Eagles' pick, it's kind of reminiscent of the fifth round in 2016. The Eagles drafted Wendell Smallwood just after a few other running backs, including Pro Bowler Jordan Howard, went off the board. The Eagles claimed Smallwood was always their guy, but it's fair to wonder.

Answering Your Questions - Iggles Blitz

That really is a great Combine showing. Gratz started 25 games for the Jaguars before they let him go. He didn’t play much last year for the Rams. I have yet to go back and study his tape. I don’t know what has worked and what hasn’t. Now that the draft is over I do have the time to check him out. The fact he is so athletic and has some experience means he has a chance to compete for a job and win it. The Eagles will give him a clean slate and clearly CB is wide open right now. Whoever wants a job just has to go win it. All that said, I wouldn’t count on Gratz doing much. He doesn’t have a great track record and seems to be declining. He is getting a fresh start in Philly and maybe that will bring out the best in him.

Quick Hits: Rookie Camp Ahead - PE.com

January 1, 2017, Lincoln Financial Field. The Eagles finished their 2016 season against the Dallas Cowboys, with a starting wide receiver corps of Nelson Agholor, Dorial Green-Beckham, and Paul Turner. Quarterback Carson Wentz averaged 5.2 yards on his 43 passing attempts ...

What free agents make the most sense for Eagles? - Morning Call

First off, forget LeGarrette Blount, the 30-year-old running back who led the league with 18 rushing TDs for New England last season. Price tag will be too high, plus he's not a fit in the passing game, either. But there are some veteran free agents out there who can help the Eagles right now. Here's a look at the most intriguing ones.

Pumphrey reveals he has second child from high school - SDUT

“There was a DNA test involved with other men. Come to find out, this thing happened three months ago … we did the DNA and he’s mine,” Pumphrey said. “And I’m taking full responsibility. I just consider it another blessing.” Pumphrey’s daughter, Maliya, has been present in his life since birth and was regularly seen at Aztecs football games during Pumphrey’s college career. The son’s name is Malik.

Silva: Dynasty Rookie Rankings - Rotoworld

Scatback build at 5-foot-8, 176, but was a workhorse at San Diego State.

Jay Cutler retires to join FOX broadcasting booth - SB Nation

The veteran quarterback followed Tony Romo’s lead and pursued a career opportunity off the field.

...

Social Media Information:

BGN Facebook Page: Click here to like our page

BGN Twitter: Follow @BleedingGreen

BGN Radio Twitter: Follow @BGN_Radio

BGN Radio Facebook: Click here to like our page

BGN Radio Patreon: Support the show!

BGN Manager: Brandon Lee Gowton: Follow @BrandonGowton