Gravity Falls is the best thing on TV at the moment.

I don't care how old you are, if you're not watching Gravity Falls you're missing out on some of the cleverest, most enjoyable television you can find.

Disney has been on a roll on the big-screen, both with its animated blockbusters like Frozen and its Marvel properties (not to mention the upcoming Star Wars films) but its TV series are also surpassing expectations. That includes shows like the very good Star Wars Rebels.

Much to my chagrin, I didn't start watching Gravity Falls until the second season had already begun.

Then again, it didn't take very long to burn through season one and the first half of season two. By the time I'd caught up completely, the show was on its midseason break---and one of the most painful cliffhangers I can recall watching a cartoon. We've watched many episodes more than once, and every single one, from the gnome-infested pilot to this past Monday's "The Stanchurian Candidate" has been delightful.

Let me stress that word: Delightful.

It's not often that I can say this about a TV show. I really enjoy Game of Thrones but it's hardly "delightful." The Americans is smart political drama, but delightful it isn't. Even some of my favorite comedies, like Parks and Recreation, while delightful at times, are often a bit...awkward.

But Gravity Falls is a joy to watch every week or, well, every week that it comes out. Which isn't every week. I'm still not entirely sure how the release schedule works, but when a new episode is on the horizon, our entire family waits with anticipation.

Gravity Falls is the brainchild of Alex Hirsch, who came up with the idea for the series in an 11-minute student short which he pitched to Disney. Lucky us, Disney bought the show and Hirsch came along with it, doing voices for a number of the characters including lovable curmudgeon Grunkle Stan and the dim but equally lovable Soos.

It's the story of two twins, Dipper (Jason Ritter) and Mabel Pines (Kristen Schaal) who go to live with Grunkle Stan in his Mystery Shack in the small town of Gravity Falls. Dipper finds a strange journal filled with entries on all the town's strange mysteries, and thus their adventure begins. Gravity Falls is a town brimming with magic, monsters, and little golf-ball people who live inside the mini golf course called Lilliputtians (as in "putting" meets Jonathan Swift.)

It's all very clever, with stories ranging from a vengeful wax museum to a board game all about statistics called Dungeons, Dungeons & Dungeons.

Gravity Falls has some of the best characters on TV.

Dipper is the adventurous nerd, out to find the truth contained in his journal. Mabel doesn't really care about that: She just wants to wear amazing sweaters, drool over boys, and play with her pet pig. Both Pines twins are fantastic characters. I don't think I've ever been so excited about sweaters before, but Mabel's sweaters are in a league of their own. And Dipper is someone whose curiosity and enthusiasm for adventure and magic remind me of myself a bit at a younger age. It's infectious.

The rest of the cast is equally, er, delightful.

Grunkle Stan is a con artist and a grumpy old man, but he's got a soft side and is brave enough to ride on the back of a pterodactyl in order to help his loved ones. He also says things like "From heck's cold heart I stab at thee!" while punching said pterodactyl in the face. I swoon with admiration.

Soos is as dumb as he is round, but he's also hilarious and adorable. And I still get his little rap song stuck in my head on a regular basis.

There are no "normal" folk in Gravity Falls. Old Man McGucket may seem like some crazy old coot, but he's got a much more intriguing past. And the villains---like Lil Gideon who made his return this past Monday---are all just as great as their hero counterparts.

(We like the show so much, I drew these characters and the kids colored them in. I can't remember the last time I felt inspired to draw characters from a TV show.)

A bevy of guest actors have already lent their voices to the show. Nick Offerman (better known as Ron Swanson,) Coolio, Nathan Fillion, and Larry King have all made small appearances. John Oliver, Patton Oswalt, Weird Al Yankovic---the list goes on and on.

Gravity Falls tells a great story with consistently excellent writing.

But what really makes the show so great is its consistently excellent writing. I haven't watched a single episode and felt letdown by its story, dialogue, or character choices. The show is at once perfectly confident in its characters and choices, and fiercely self-aware, tossing in plenty of little references to its fans expectations. This has become even more true in the second half of season two, in which at least one very big mystery was resolved.

There are few shows that manage to do what Gravity Falls does with its story.

The show is consistently, laugh-out-loud funny every week, with a new adventure or conflict ready for our heroes to overcome. But the show never loses sight of the long-game: The big overarching story of mystery and dark magic that lurks just beneath the surface.

I think of the X-Files because the shows are quite similar---one a comedy and one a drama, but still two shows about investigating the unknown and uncanny. The X-Files also had its big, overarching plot---though, sadly, it fell apart in just about every conceivable way. So far, at least, Gravity Falls seems to be doing what X-Files could not: Maintain that difficult balance between long-term plotting and weekly, serialized adventures. Dipper is Fox Mulder for a new generation.

Dipper is Fox Mulder for a new generation.

And the community surrounding the show is similar to the one that grew up around the X-Files. Fan theories ran rampant throughout the second season, and still do. It's kind of amazing for what is, ostensibly at least, a cartoon for kids.

Gravity Falls is a show for everybody.

Whether that will last remains to be seen, but right now Gravity Falls is the one show I can honestly recommend for everybody. Grown-ups, watch it with your kids. Kids, watch it with your parents.

It's neither vulgar nor stupid, and while it's a show about weird things happening in a very strange little town, it's not the sort of super bizarre adult comedy we often get with cartoons directed at adults. There's nothing polarizing or negative, and yet the show's writers never play it safe, either.

For me at least, Gravity Falls is a reminder that you don't need to be cool or edgy or gross or controversial to be funny, smart, and fun.

It's the perfect TV show. Stop reading and go watch it.