I wasn't surprised upon reading up on Tucson, Arizona band, North, that back in 2005 they started out as an instrumental act. Those gigantic, crashing chords and post-metal melodies captivated me instantaneously before the vocals had time to catch up. This is the definition of what the more melodic side of sludge is all about. Somewhere in between Beautaly's Einfallen and Trapped Within Burning Machinery's The Filth Element exists a new masterpiece called Light the Way.

And when I said "instantaneously," I meant it. From the first few seconds of sampling the amazing title track for the original post, and then once more in just the 2 minute intro of "Moonswan" when I had my first full playthrough, I was glued. Immediately, everything else in my day was a distant memory. Listening to this album was like awaking from a dream; where my workday, any troubles at home, and virtually anything else occupying my mind were but glimmers behind an impenetrable veneer.

North mixes the light and darkness as if they were elements you could simply put in a bowl and whisk. Big, brooding power chords crunch through thunderous grooves and depressive doom riffs in time with the emphasis of each strike of snare and cymbal. Yet all the while I am levitating in a cathartic energy brought forth by the post rock and post metal lead guitar. As the surging weight of the world is carried by the gruff-but-powerful screams and rhythm section, I am watching it all from a safe distance above; acknowledging, accepting, transcending.

Light The Way, true to its name, is a guiding star through the darkness. Sometimes when things seem the most grim in my life it takes a moment of reflection or meditation on the finer details to get back on track: a cross-examination, perhaps with a temporary glance from an outside perspective. This album is the auditory equivalent of that process. Who couldn't use a little more of that? Anyways, if you are looking for a more down to earth, sonic description I would call North a hopeful, melodic counterpoint to The Lion's Daughter. The album comes out today and is streaming below. Another must-hear for 2016.