The £3,500 laser surgery that will stop you sweating for good

It's no sweat: Model Danielle Lloyd has suffered in the past

A little perspiration is one of life’s minor irritations – unless you are a celebrity in the unforgiving glare of the paparazzi camera lenses.



Most people simply reach for the trusty deodorant to keep it at bay, but for the worst-affected sufferers it can be a real social nightmare.



Now a British surgeon is offering a more permanent solution.



A new cosmetic surgery technique, available for the first time in the UK, claims to be able to get rid of underarm sweat for good.



The £3,500 hour-long procedure, pioneered in Brazil, uses a laser to burn away underarm sweat glands and claims to leave patients with minimal scarring and sweat-free armpits.



Previously, one of the few options for people with sweat problems has been major surgery conducted under general anaesthetic to cut nerves in the chest that lead to the sweat glands.



Celebrities including former Miss England and Celebrity Big Brother contestant Danielle Lloyd have also resorted to injections of anti-wrinkle treatment Botox under the arms, which offers a temporary solution.



The new technique, called Laser Sweat Ablation, is said to be able to help cure everything from minor sweat problems to axillary hyperhidrosis – excessive, uncontrollable sweating which can cause enormous discomfort and embarrassment.



But experts are concerned that the procedure means patients will seek surgical treatment even if their condition could be better dealt with by behavioural therapists.



They say some cases of excessive sweating can be caused by nerves or psychological problems.



They also claim that surgery on the underarm area has a high likelihood of complications because it can become easily infected, and that it should be considered a last-resort treatment.



The technique is being introduced by consultant vascular surgeon Mark Whiteley, who pioneered the country’s first keyhole surgery for varicose veins ten years ago.

He will treat the first British patient at his private clinic in nearby Guildford, tomorrow. Mr Whiteley said the procedure would ‘transform people’s lives’.

Before the operation, the underarms are coated with iodine and a starch is applied, identifying where the sweat glands are. The patient is then given a local anaesthetic and surgeons make a 3mm incision, separating the skin from the body tissue.

A standard surgical laser is inserted to burn away the glands from beneath the skin layer. The whole operation takes around one hour.



Mr Whiteley added: ‘The Laser Sweat Ablation treatment allows patient to return to their normal activities within hours of treatment, and be fully recovered after four to seven days.’



The patient said: ‘I have been suffering from excessively sweaty armpits for more than five years and it makes me feel very self-conscious.



‘I tried Botox injections for a while but they are very expensive and only give a temporary result.



‘It will be a great relief never to have to worry about sweat patches on my clothes again.’



However, Professor Christopher Mathias, a neurovascular medicine specialist at the University of London, has some concerns.

He said: ‘It could be great for patients. However, removing sweat glands is a tricky operation and there could be complications from infection. Surgery should always be a last resort.’