A prominent Pembroke dentist who drank and drove before killing a father of three is now staring down a lengthy prison term after a judge found her guilty of impaired and dangerous driving causing death.

After a marathon trial that spanned nearly three years and featured the best team of defence lawyers money can buy in Ottawa, Dr. Christy Natsis is now facing that stark reality after a judge concluded Friday that her driving on the night of March 31, 2011 was a danger to the public and caused the death of Bryan Casey in a head-on crash on Hwy. 17 near Arnprior.

The verdict was a huge victory for Crown prosecutors, who had to overcome a ruling earlier in the trial that tossed out breath readings that showed Natsis had a blood-alcohol level nearly 2 1/2 times the legal limit after the judge found the OPP violated her Charter rights by repeatedly interrupting — and eventually hanging up on — a call to her lawyer.

Immediately following the verdict, a wave of relief washed over Casey’s widow, LeeEllen Carroll, and his father, Gus, who sat quietly in the courtroom as they have for all 55 previous days of the long-running trial.

“We’ve been in court every single day of the trial and we’ve heard the evidence, we know the facts, we know the truth,” Carroll said outside the courthouse.

“We are relieved that justice is being done. The pain inflicted upon us and our families from the crash and the drawn out court case has left a huge impact on our family. It should not be experienced by others. I will never forget the look on my children’s faces when I told them what happened. I will never forget the pain in their eyes and in their hearts,” Carroll said.

Natis showed little reaction after Ontario Court Justice Neil Kozloff took three hours to deliver his verdict, meticulously outlining the evidence of each of the more than two dozen witnesses who testified during the trial. In the end, he said he chose to rely on the eyewitness evidence that painted a picture of a heavily intoxicated and unsteady Natsis leaving the Crazy Horse bar in Kanata following two glasses of wine, backing her Ford Expedition into a parked car and then swerving all over the highway at speeds that at times approached 130 km/h. Kozloff said he accepted witness evidence that she nearly hit a concrete wall during the 24-minute drive that ended with her slamming head-on into Casey’s Dodge pickup.

Numerous witnesses — other drivers who stepped to help, police officers and a paramedic — said they detected an odour of alcohol on Natsis following the crash, the judge added. Natsis’ average speed was 112 km/h during the 45 kilometre drive, the judge noted.

“Such conduct demonstrates a recklessness in creating a risk or danger to other users of the highway which, in considering the evidence of driving conduct, establishes a pattern of disregard for the safety of other users of the highway which amounts to a marked departure from the standard of care of a reasonably prudent driver,” said Kozloff.

Casey, 50, suffered a broken femur, hip and pelvis and was bleeding to death internally when he went into cardiac arrest in the ambulance on the way to hospital in Ottawa.

Evidence collected by the OPP from the crash scene and computer modules inside Natsis and Casey’s wrecked vehicles further convinced the judge of Natsis’s guilt, he said. The trial heard evidence that Casey himself had a blood-alcohol level 1 1/2 times the legal limit to drive, but gouge marks and the debris field proved the crash occurred entirely within Casey’s eastbound lane.

Data gathered from Natsis’ vehicle showed she never slowed from the 87 km/h she was driving in the seconds before hitting Casey, who was not at all to blame for the fatal crash, Kozloff said.

“Mr. Casey, in spite of his elevated blood-alcohol level, perceived the danger presented by the presence of the Natsis vehicle entirely within his lane and reacted. He removed his foot from the accelerator, he applied his brakes, he began to turn his vehicle away and he reduced his speed … thereby taking evasive action in an apparent and tragically unsuccessful attempt to avoid a collision with the Ford Expedition,” Kozloff said.

Natsis’s highly skilled defence team, made up of top lawyers Michael Edelson and his partners, Vince Clifford and Solomon Friedman, had spent a great deal of the trial attacking the OPP’s collision investigation and accusing the officers involved of being biased and incompetent. Their efforts didn’t sway the judge, who noted the “sloppiness” of portions of collision investigator Shawn Kelly’s crash report but ultimately accepted its key findings, which were supported by the evidence and the work of other officers.

The 50-year-old Natsis — who remains out of custody on bail — will next return to court on June 10 when a date for her sentencing hearing is expected to be set.

Impaired driving causing death convictions typically carry prison sentences of between two and five years for first time offenders.

aseymour@ottawacitizen.com

Twitter.com/andrew_seymour