The original plan was to compile a list of the national media's Fake News only as needed -- but no more often than once a week. Unfortunately, our MSM has done so much lying in the last 5 days, I started to worry that I could lose track. Simply put, the last few days have been a fire hose of Fake News.

Read everything below, and then try to make an argument that Steve Bannon isn't 100% correct about the national media being the opposition party.

P.S. Here is last week's list.

1. Entire Media Lies About Trump's Refugee Pause Being a "Muslim Ban"

Using 7 countries designated by the Obama administration as failed states crawling with Islamic terrorists, the Trump administration instituted a pause on the admission of foreign nationals coming from those countries for 90 days, and halted the refugee programs from all countries for 120 days to beef up the vetting process. In the 40-plus other Muslim-majority countries throughout the world, immigration continues as usual.

A Muslim ban would ban Muslims. Trump's refugee pause affects all people of all religions and does not at all affect over three dozen other Muslim-majority countries.

Calling this a Muslim Ban is an outright lie.

2. CNN Lies About Tying Fox News In the Ratings On Inauguration Day

The ratings weren't even close. CNN came in a distant second place, a humiliating second pace.

3. Time Magazine Blames Misreporting On Trump

Time Magazine's Ryan Teague Beckwith attempted to blame misreporting on Trump's Executive Orders on Trump. This of course is an absurd lie. The Executive Orders might not be released as quickly as Time would like, but that in no way excuses Fake News from left-wing reporters attempting to fill in the blanks to suit their own twisted agenda.

4. Washington Post "Fact Checker" Attempts to Gin Up Dissent Against Trump

Washington Post fact-checker Glenn Kessler, the single most dishonest member of the media I have ever come across, used his Twitter feed to outright manufacture Fake News against Trump. He called on foreign-service officers to sign a dissent memo, which would then become an anti-Trump story.

5. EXTRAORDINARY Lies of Omission About Foreign-Born Threats to America

In their push for a narrative, Fake News oftentimes comes from what the media intentionally fails to report. The lack of context is purposeful in pursuit of their destroy-Trump agenda. Here is what you are not being told about the very real threat of foreign-born terrorists:

US May Have Let 'Dozens' of Terrorists Into Country As Refugees

Between 2001 and 2014, 380 foreign-born terrorists were convicted in America, 40 of those were refugees.

Islamic State finds success infiltrating its terrorists into refugee flows to West

6. AP Reports that Trump's Vote Fraud Expert is Registered in Three States

By reporting non-news as news, the AP's obvious goal is to mislead readers into believing this man is committing vote fraud. Many people are registered in more than one state. I myself am registered in Wisconsin, California, and North Carolina. We are a transient country. Millions have lived and voted and registered in more than one state. This is a non-story.

Imagine if the AP was this concerned about actual illegal voting.

7. The Viral Lie that Dick Cheney Blasted Trump Over His Refugee Pause

Never happened.

8. Media Lies About Trump's Refugee Pause Based On His Business Interests

From NPR, to Fortune magazine, to Reuters, to Vox… The lie that Trump's refugee pause is based on countries his company does not do business with went viral for a full day.

Even the left-wing Washington Post got on board.

As we now know, the seven countries chosen by Trump came from a list the Obama Administration put together, a list of countries riddled with terror and lacking in the infrastructure necessary to adequately vet immigrants and refugees.

9. ABC News Accuses Trump of Not Having Family Photos in the Oval Office

Based on a single photograph that doesn't begin to show what might be in a 800-plus square foot office, ABC News's Terry Moran fired off the Fake News that the lack of family pictures in that particular photograph was meaningful.

Obviously, the MSM chose to learn nothing from the Fake News fiasco involving the bust of Rev. Martin Luther King.

10. The Islamophobic Media Lie That Refugee Pauses Create Terrorists

In their zeal to attack Trump, time and again the media revealed its own Islamophobia by spreading the debunked lie that such actions create more terrorists. Over and over and over again, the media coordinated a narrative that claimed Muslims become terrorists when they do not get their way.

If that's not outright bigotry, if that's not looking at a group of people as scary others, what is?

11. The Lie That Mike Flynn's Son Called the Refugee Pause a 'Muslim Ban'

Based only on a Tweet that included the tag #MuslimBan, Politico's Blake Hounshell and CNN's Jake Tapper spread the lie that this somehow meant Mike Flynn Jr., son of Trump's National Security Advisor, had declared Trump's refugee pause a "Muslim Ban."

Using a tag to get into a top Twitter conversation means absolutely nothing. Everyone knows this, but Tapper and Hounshell still spread what they knew could be a lie.

12. Media Spreads Lies of "Mass Resignations" at State Department

The Washington Post's Josh Rogin spread the flat-out lie that there was a "mass exodus of senior Foreign Service officers" at the State Department. All of it due to Trump.

The truth is that the White House asked for these resignations. Furthermore, the truth is that this is standard operating procedure with a new administration.

13. New York Times' Maggie Haberman Claims Only San Bernardino Shootings Involved 'Non-US-Born Attacker'

Maggie Haberman, who shares the dual-honor of being biased and not very bright, had her Fake News immediately corrected by Twitter users, none of whom enjoy the enormous resources of the leftwing New York Times.

14. Media Falsely Claims Obama Did Not Discriminate Against Christian Refugees

By cherry-picking one year, 2016, and being hyper-literal about Trump's statement that it was "impossible" for Christian refugees to gain entry into America under Obama, the media spread the Fake News that Christians were not discriminated against by Obama.

Here is the truth:

But the numbers tell a different story: The United States has accepted 10,801 Syrian refugees, of whom 56 are Christian. Not 56 percent; 56 total, out of 10,801. That is to say, one-half of 1 percent. The BBC says that 10 percent of all Syrians are Christian, which would mean 2.2 million Christians. It is quite obvious, and President Barack Obama and Secretary John Kerry have acknowledged it, that Middle Eastern Christians are an especially persecuted group. So how is it that one-half of 1 percent of the Syrian refugees we’ve admitted are Christian, or 56, instead of about 1,000 out of 10,801—or far more, given that they certainly meet the legal definition?

15. CNN's Jim Sciutto Spreads Lie That "Refugee Policy Is Not Based On Religion"

Sciutto, a former Obama official, also lied about Christians not being discriminated against.

Sciutto is a lying liar who lies.

16. Media Lies About Trump Installing a Gag Order Against the EPA

Standard operating procedure with a new administration was again turned into Nazi Germany.

17. Media Covered Up and Lied About Obama's 2011 Refugee Ban

Due to the same fears in 2011, then-President Obama instituted a refugee ban from Iraq that lasted six months. Not only did the media cover it up, in order to protect Obama and their Narrative, the media are now falsely spreading the Fake News that Obama's refugee six-month ban from a Muslim-majority country is somehow different from Trump's.

Yeah, it's not.

18. Washington Post Publishes Partisan Editorial as Straight News Story

Pretty outrageous.

19. NBC's Chuck Todd Falsely Claims Fear of Sexism Contributed to Major Hillary Cover-up

While I appreciate Chuck Todd admitting that he and the rest of the national media covered up the fact that they all knew how despised Hillary was in the Midwest, his excuse is just flat-out wrong. Todd claimed he and the rest of the media covered up a vital truth fearing it would be sexist to tell this truth.

What poppycock.

1) We all know Todd and Company would not have covered this truth up if it were Sarah Palin, as opposed to Hillary.

2) What is sexist about "Hillary for Prison" signs? What is sexist about despising a politician? Nothing. If the signs read, "Women make Lousy Presidents" or "Hillary is a Bitch," that is sexist.

But you can also bet that Todd and company would have gleefully reported on those!

20. Philadelphia Inquirer Contradicts Its Own Reporting to Gotcha Trump

In September of 2016, the Inquirer reported that the murder rate was on the increase. After Trump agreed with them, the same outlet called him a liar.

21. Even MORE Corrections from the Atlantic on Their Fake News Reporting About the Unborn

We reported on this debacle last week. But since then, the Atlantic has had to add even more corrections.

22. Media Spreads Lie That Trump's Chief Advisor Told the Media to "Shut Up"

The national media loves to talk about themselves and feel persecuted, so Steve Bannon's suggestion that the media "should keep its mouth shut and just listen for a while" to the American people, was quickly turned into an act of persecution.

No one lied more about this than CNN's Jake Tapper.

Tapper even won the prize for being the most smug while spreading the lie.

Bannon never said shut up. All he expressed was the same opinion many in the media have after facing the fallout of the 2016 debacle. Meaning, maybe we need to listen more to the voters and less to our own echo chamber.

Nonetheless, CNN put "shut up" in quote marks. That is a lie. That is spreading the fake news that Bannon said something he did not say.

Politico's media reporter did the same.

Even the t-shirts lie.

22. ABC News Memory-Holes Key Part of Trump Interview

During David Muir's interview with Trump, the president criticized the media for always underplaying the massive crowds at the annual March for Life.

That part of the interview was omitted from the network's official transcript.

23. WINTER IS COMING: ABC News Busted Promoting Fake Image of Trump

Trump looking out a window at a cold, foggy blizzard, is much more ominous-looking than the truth…

The weather that day was sunny and 60 degrees.

24. Media Falsely Claim There Is Zero Evidence of Widespread Vote Fraud

After Trump again said that as many as 3 to 5 million illegal votes may have been cast in 2016, the national media went on a Fake News spree claiming that no evidence of any kind exists to back up this claim.

This was fairly typical of the lies spread.

In fact, there is all kinds of evidence about widespread vote fraud.

1. The Media claiming it doesn’t exist is excellent reason to believe it does.

2. Despite its widespread popularity even among Democrats, the MSM and Democrats fight tooth and nail against voter ID.

3. There is this study that was published by no less than the Washington Post.

4. There is also this study.

5. And this study.

--

This has been this week's edition of OMG LOOK AT ALL THE LIES TOLD BY THE MSM!

Be sure to tune in next week for another edition of OMG LOOK AT ALL THE LIES TOLD BY THE MSM!

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC