During the month of June, Israeli air strikes on Gaza killed more than a dozen Palestinians and injured more than 70. According to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “Between 20 and 23 June, the Israeli air force launched a series of air strikes, targeting metal workshops, civilian structures, motorcycles carrying armed Palestinians, military bases and open fields.” One victim, 12-year-old Mamoun al-Dam, was killed in an Israeli missile strike while picnicking with his family. During this time, one Israeli soldier was killed by a Palestinian gunman.

Also during June, Palestinian prisoner Akram Rikhawi continued his open-ended hunger strike, now going on 86 days, in protest of Israel’s refusal to release him on humanitarian grounds. Samer al-Barq and Hassan Safadi also renewed their hunger strikes after Israeli violated the agreement ending the mass hunger strike in the prisons by extending the orders to detain the men without charge or trial — a practice known as administrative detention.

Palestinians also marked for the 45th year the Naksa, or setback — the military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip which began after Israel captured the territories during the 1967 War.

This month Israel also began rounding up African refugees and deporting them en masse; “Israel belongs to the white man,” declared Eli Yishai, Israel’s interior minister.

Thaer Halahleh (right) in the West Bank village of Kharas near Hebron following his release from Israeli prison after a 78-day hunger strike. At Halahleh’s left is Khader Adnan, who inspired a wave of hunger strikes among Palestinian political prisoners. Mamoun Wazwaz APA images

A Palestinian woman mourns Naim al-Najjar during his funeral in the West Bank village of Idhna, near Hebron, 17 June. Al-Najjar and another man were shot dead by an Israeli truck driver in the occupied West Bank. Issam Rimawi APA images

Palestinian boys inspect the damage at a dairy factory in Gaza City after it was hit during Israeli air strikes the previous day, 4 June. Yasser Fathi APA images

Relatives of Ahmed Nassir mourn during his funeral in Khan Younis in the southern Gaza Strip, 2 June. Nassir killed an Israeli soldier before being shot dead himself in a rare cross-border attack. Eyad Al Baba APA images

A Palestinian boy wounded during Israeli air strikes on Gaza City, 20 June. Ali Jadallah APA images

A relative of Thaer al-Baik collapses during the man’s funeral in Jabalia refugee camp in the northern Gaza Strip, 21 June. Al-Baik, 30, and another member of Hamas’ armed wing suffocated in a tunnel at a Hamas training camp after it was hit in an Israeli air strike, according to reports. Ashraf Amra APA images

Palestinian mourners pray over the body of Hadeel al-Haddad during her funeral in Gaza City, 20 June. The girl was killed the previous day when a rocket fired by Palestinian fighters fell short of its target in Israel. Ali Jadallah APA images

Palestinians in the refugee camp of Nahr al-Bared in north Lebanon take part in a funeral procession for 15-year-old Palestinian Ahmad Qassim, who was killed at a Lebanese army checkpoint in the camp. Liu Shun Xinhua/Zumapress

Palestinians in the occupied West Bank city of Nablus demonstrate in solidarity with Palestinian hunger striker Mahmoud Sarsak. Sarsak, a footballer with the Palestinian national team, refused food for nearly three months before Israel agreed to release him when his current detention orders expire. Ahmad Al-Bazz ActiveStills

A protest and press conference is held outisde the Nablus home of Hassan Safadi who renewed his hunger strike after Israel extended orders to hold him without charge or trial, 28 June. Ahmad Al-Bazz ActiveStills

Residents of al-Mufaqarah village in the West Bank’s South Hebron Hills pause to pray after being forbidden to continue building the local mosque. The original mosque was demolished last November. Kelly Lynn

Palestinian policemen confront demonstrators during a protest against a meeting between Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and Deputy Israeli Prime Minister Shaul Mofaz in the occupied West Bank city of Ramallah, 30 June. Fadi Arouri Xinhua

Palestinian protesters hold flags and banners during a demonstration against the Israeli occupation and to mark Naksa Day, the 44th anniversary of the 1967 Six Day War, at the entrance of the old city near the settlement of Beit Romano in the occupied West Bank town of Hebron, 5 June. Mamoun Wazwaz APA images

Graffiti in Hebrew reading “Death to Arabs,” “revenge” and “Hello from Gilad’s farm” (an illegal settler outpost) spray-painted on a wall in the “coexistence” community of Neve Shalom/Wahat al-Salam (Oasis of Peace), west of Jerusalem, on 8 June. Vandals rampaged overnight, slashing car tires and spraying graffiti. Oren Ziv ActiveStills

A Sudanese activist hangs a poster of an African refugee with the slogan “Refugee, not an infiltrator” as part of a campaign against the deportation of refugees, Tel Aviv, 13 June. Oren Ziv ActiveStills

An Israeli activist says goodbye to a South Sudanese youth as he sits in a bus taking him from Tel Aviv to Ben Gurion airport to be deported to South Sudan with another 120 persons on a flight leaving the same night, 17 June. Oren Ziv ActiveStills

A Palestinian protester during a weekly demonstration against the wall and settlements in the occupied West Bank village of Nilin, 15 June. Ahmed Mesleh APA images

A Palestinian family observes Israeli soldiers during clashes with Palestinian protesters in the West Bank village of Nabi Saleh near Ramallah, 22 June. Used tear gas canisters used against previous demonstrations against the occupation and settlements are strung together for display outside the home. Issam Rimawi APA images

Palestinians in Gaza City celebrate the victory of Muslim Brotherhood candidate Mohammed Morsi in Egypt’s first free presidential elections, 24 June. Wissam Nassar APA images

Activists march in Tel Aviv during a protest marking 45 years of Israeli occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, 9 June. Keren Manor ActiveStills

Palestinians harvest wheat in al-Sawiya village near Nablus in the occupied West Bank, 14 June. Ahmad Al-Bazz ActiveStills

A Palestinian employee works at the al-Arz ice cream factory in the occupied West Bank City of Nablus, 19 June. Nedal Eshtayah APA images

A Palestinian baker prepares bread at his bakery in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip, 13 June. Eyad Al Baba APA images

Palestinian boys read verses from the Quran during a class on how to read Islam’s holy book at a mosque in Rafah, southern occupied Gaza Strip, 14 June. Eyad Al Baba APA images

Palestinian girls sit for their final high school exams, known as tawjihi, in Gaza City, 9 June. Yasser Fathi APA images

Palestinians enjoy the steam bath at the 400-year-old traditional Turkish bath Hamam al-Shifa in the occupied West Bank City of Nablus, 27 June. Nedal Eshtayah APA images

Palestinians in Gaza City enjoy the beach, 27 June. Majdi Fathi APA images

Young couples wearing traditional dress take part in a wedding during the opening of Heritage Week in Birzeit village near Ramallah in the occupied West Bank, 27 June. Issam Rimawi APA images

Palestinians celebrate during a mass wedding party for 19 grooms in the village of Silwad near the occupied West Bank city of Ramallah, 28 June. Issam Rimawi APA images

The Electronic Intifada welcomes photographic contributions from readers. If you have high-quality images for consideration for the next edition of the Month in Photos, email info A T electronicintifada D O T net.