The Chong Chon Gang, the North Korean vessel caught smuggling weaponry through the Panama Canal, broadcast its return to Havana, Cuba on March 21.

The vessel continued to transmit positional data for three days, with the last signal sent at 3.14pm on March 26. The ship’s last know position in Havana Harbour is still currently visible on the NK News Vessel Tracker.

The 14000 tonne vessel docked at a birth in the Ensenada de Atarés area of the port, a part of the harbor dedicated to shipping and vessel repair services.

It is not currently known if the North Korean vessel is still in port or has left without broadcasting further positional information. Havana’s Port Authority could not be reached for comment.

The ship left Limon Bay near the Panama Canal more than five weeks ago on February 15. Sailing at its average speed of 9.1 knots the Chong Chon Gang could theoretically cover the distance between the two countries in approximately five days.

Whilst it was reported that the Chong Chon Gang would return to Cuba after being released by the Panamanian authorities, their reasons for returning to country where the North Koreans picked up the military hardware are unclear.

The seizure of the vessel in July 2013 provided the UN Panel of Experts with “unrivalled insight into some of the ways used [by North Korea] to evade sanctions.”

According to the Panel of Experts’ most recent sanctions report, the ship left North Korea in April 2013 and proceeded to Cuba via Vostochny in Russia and through the Panama Canal. The general cargo vessel then made three stops in Cuba, visiting Havana, and two smaller ports, Mariel and Puerto Padre, before being seized on its return journey through Panama.

“On 20 June, the ship docked in the port of Mariel, where it took on board the arms and related materiel. On 22 June, the Chong Chon Gang sailed to Puerto Padre, docking on 24 June to load sugar,” the UN report reads. The 10,000 tonnes of sugar was used to conceal the weapons and military hardware.

The Chong Chon Gang’s crew were released by the Panamanian authorities, except for the captain and two other officers that remained to face charges of weapons trafficking.

Featured Image: Eric Lafforgue