Spoiler: 2/17/2015 Umbra of Shadows said: INTJ - Ivysaur



Initially, it seems like the INTJ group is very diverse (with mains for Ice Climbers, Ivysaur, Mewtwo, Marth, Fox, and Mario).



However, it may be possible that the reasoning for playing these characters is similar: INTJs may choose characters that are often seen as unconventional (Ice Climbers, Ivyasur, Mewtwo) in hopes of using the unique aspects of those characters to their advantage by having a unique playstyle and making innovations. Alternatively, they may choose characters that are more often seen as conventional (Marth, Fox, Mario) in order to play those characters in an unconventional and innovative way, thereby giving them a unique and advantageous playstyle. In both cases, the INTJ players, myself included, would be driven to win by using strategies that others may not see as viable despite making perfect sense to the people of this personality group, causing INTJ players to play fairly differently from other players.



I would suggest that each person that takes this poll and replies to this thread explains why he/she plays his/her character, as it may allow for better analysis of data and trends to determine if one's personality type does in fact affect his/her main.



So, to begin, I chose to play as Ivysaur because I enjoyed the unconventional (yet effective) playstyle I could employ with Ivysaur, including Razor Leaf and F-Air approaches, Seed Bomb applications (keeping foes back and vertical attacking), Down Throw combos, and the strategic timing of Synthesis and Solar Beam, just to name a few aspects of it.



Does anyone else have any thoughts on my hypothesis? Click to expand... Shockbound said: I have the same understanding about finding satisfaction in being unconventional. My type was INTP, but the difference between that and INTJ isn't all that big. To me, the potential for widespread playstyle diversity is one of the most appealing qualities of Project M. It's one of few games where I've been rewarded for trying to be unique, but it's been the only game in which I've been rewarded enough for it to actually be comparable to using the more mainstream methods of play.



My preference for unconventionality manifests itself in several ways, but the most evident one comes from the fact that I play Mr. Game & Watch competitively. The sheer variety of uses that each of his moves carry is what makes him so appealing to me; his moves don't have sweetspots or sourspots, but they have sweet or sour "times" where the same move can range from being very strong to very weak the longer the hitbox stays out. Proper timing of these moves results in outstanding combos that are different every time. His neutral may be weak, but I've always preferred careful planning and setup for huge payoffs over ones that are drawn out over time. Additionally, the fact that nobody in my region has any idea what this character is supposed to do just makes it all the more satisfying to blather endlessly about his massive supply of unique features and quirks.



Thank you for bringing this up, this reminded me of the reason why I decided to keep the results hidden while the survey was still open. I had the same thought you did, so I knew that many people who play a particular character like to think that they are "special" because of it (and they often are when only considering their local environment). If I had the results visible while these people were still submitting entries, it could potentially discourage them from admitting who they really play if they get the impression that everybody and their mother plays the same thing. This could heavily affect the results of the survey since it would not accurately reflect the amount of people who play certain characters. Click to expand... the survey is closing TODAY at 12:00 PM (PST) . If you or somebody you know has not yet submitted an entry, do it right this instant since you will not get a chance to do so afterwards. Once the survey has closed, I will begin working on crunching the numbers into a presentable format since they will have finally stopped changing. This could take a good deal of time, and I cannot guarantee that I will get all of it done until later tonight. Rest assured that the results will become public as soon as I am done with all of the compiling.



In the meantime, I'd like to see everyone's thoughts about what Umbra posted. Why do you think you play your character? . If you or somebody you know has not yet submitted an entry,since you will not get a chance to do so afterwards. Once the survey has closed, I will begin working on crunching the numbers into a presentable format since they will have finally stopped changing. This could take a good deal of time, and I cannot guarantee that I will get all of it done until later tonight. Rest assured that the results will become public as soon as I am done with all of the compiling.In the meantime, I'd like to see everyone's thoughts about what Umbra posted. Why do youyou play your character?

Spoiler: 2/13/2015



To put it simply, we need a lot more people to complete the survey in order to attain reliable results. 1,505 is impressive to be sure, but it just isn't enough for what is trying to be accomplished. 25,000 would be the ideal goal, but I don't feel like it's much of a realistic one given the available timeframe; I feel like it could be possible to make it to 5,000 by the closure date.



However, I don't see this happening either judging by the steadily dropping rate of new respondents. If you want to see more reliable results for your dearly treasured minorities, this survey needs to spread around until it eventually gets noticed by some of them. This does not mean that you should present the survey directly to those you believe are minorities. It should instead be presented to large communities that contain a healthy variety of PM smashers so that the results can stay as unbiased as possible.



The results are starting to look very interesting, so I'd like to see this get more exposure. The survey fell off of the front page of the PM Reddit, so it's time to start looking in other places. Huge thanks go out to everybody helping me with this.

eideeiit said: An INTP with a PM Squirtle and Melee Marth and Sheik here. Woah. Someone should really do this for Melee too. Click to expand... As a quick update for all of you, the survey has been completed by 1,505 people thus far. The amount of data received is starting to become significant, but splitting up all of the people into their respective groups leaves certain minorities lacking in the way of a statistically reliable sample pool. I would elaborate further, but I fear that doing so would affect the results of the survey.To put it simply, we needmore people to complete the survey in order to attain reliable results. 1,505 is impressive to be sure, but it just isn't enough for what is trying to be accomplished. 25,000 would be the ideal goal, but I don't feel like it's much of a realistic one given the available timeframe; I feel like it could be possible to make it to 5,000 by the closure date.However, I don't see this happening either judging by the steadily dropping rate of new respondents. If you want to see more reliable results for your dearly treasured minorities, this survey needs to spread around until it eventually gets noticed by some of them.It should instead be presented to large communities that contain a healthy variety of PM smashers so that the results can stay as unbiased as possible.The results are starting to look very interesting, so I'd like to see this get more exposure. The survey fell off of the front page of the PM Reddit, so it's time to start looking in other places. Huge thanks go out to everybody helping me with this.I'm considering it. It'll definitely have to be after this survey closes, though. Staying on top of all of the trends in the data is proving to be a lot of work.

Shockbound said: The plan right now is to release the % distribution of personality types on a single chart and a separate chart will display % distribution of character popularity. These first two charts will be independent of one another.



After these two charts are presented, each personality type will have a chart of their own that provides a % distribution of character popularity specifically for that personality type. After all 16 of these charts are presented, another set of charts will display the % distribution of personality types for each individual character.



After this, further information about the frequency of each letter will be applied to all of the smashers that made a submission (as in what % of them have the Introverted trait) as well as to certain characters (for instance, what % of Luigi players have the Introverted trait). Other features will be announced later. Click to expand...

will not be considered

[collapse="2/11/2015"]Yesterday I came across an interesting online test that categorizes those who take it into 16 different groups of personalities; this was the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator , the classic psychometric questionnaire dating all the way back from 1962. Someone (Shadow293903) posted a link to this in the Project M chat at Anther's Smash Ladder and suddenly everybody was sharing their results with each other.After looking at my own results, I found a statistic claiming that my personality type encompassed only 3% of the world's population. However, after looking at the chat I could see that there was at least one other person who got the same result as I did. It may have just been one person, but it made me think, "what are the odds of that?"I began thinking that my personality type could possibly be more common among smashers like myself, which is obviously a far smaller pool than the entire world's population. Soon afterwards, I began wondering whether it could be possible that a vastly different distribution of personality types existed within the smash community as compared to the entire world.This same diversity reminded me of how some characters are more commonly played than others. Delving deeper into this, I wondered if there was even more diversity among those who played particular characters.So I've developed a theory, and I need the Project M community as a resource to begin verifying it.The basis of this theory was developed on a post I had once seen on Smashboards, which was something along the lines of, "Is it just me, or are all the Ice Climber mains just homies?" I was reminded of this when I learned that the character that I main was also the main of the person in the ladder chat that shared my personality type. Now what are the odds ofI've created a survey to try and figure this out. It requires that you know your personality type before you answer anything on it, so you might as well get that out of the way before starting.You can take it here:As is true of all surveys, the results will not be made public until after a certain amount of time has passed. I will be editing this main post with the results on February 17th (I may or may not close the survey at the same time, we'll see). It would be helpful and very much appreciated if those of you who are also curious about the results could spread this survey around the internet a bit so that the data can be as accurate as possible.I'll also be editing this post later with what exactly my theory is and how I plan to lay out the results for it. Feel free to post what character and personality type you entered for the survey on this thread in the meantime.Please remember to fill out questions 3 and 4! Lots of people seem to be getting the impression that they don't need to fill these out since questions 1 and 2 asked for the exact same thing.. You should be putting in the same answers for 3 and 4 as you did for 1 and 2. If you didn't fill out questions 3 and 4, then your datawhen everything is compiled.