After he kicks off 2014 with a number of appearances at the San Francisco Sketch Fest in late January (http://sfsketchfest.com), Eugene Mirman, Brooklyn comedy staple and voice of 'Gene' on Bob's Burgers, will take to the road to perform in Carrboro, Asheville, Atlanta, Louisville, Lakewood, Pittsburgh and Ithaca.

Said Eugene, "Without being specific, most of these cities are wonderful and only one or two really need fixing. I am excited for this tour and got an okay deal on a rental car from Avis."

About Eugene MirmanBrooklyn resident, Eugene Mirman escaped the clutches of Russian communism at the age of four when his family immigrated from Moscow to Lexington, MA (where along with Paul Revere and John Adams he kicked off the American revolution). He attended Hampshire College and designed his own major of Comedy - doing a one-hour standup act as his thesis, for which he was made fun of, don't worry.

Currently, he does The Voice of "Gene" on Fox's newest hit animated series, Bob's Burgers. In the streets he's sometimes recognized as Eugene, the landlord, from Flight of the Conchords or from his role as comedian/mobster Yvgeny Mirminsky on Adult Swim's Delocated. On Aqua Teen Hunger Force he's Dr. Eugene Mirman and on Home Movies he was Eugene, the Russian foreign exchange student. Eugene Mirman: An Evening of Comedy in a Fake Underground Laboratory, his 2nd Comedy Central Special, aired on the channel in late 2012 and was released on CD/DVD in February 2013.

Eugene was named Best New York City Comedian by the Village Voice, one of "50 Funniest" by Time Out New York, and one of the 10 best comedians of the last decade by Paste Magazine. He's released three comedy albums (the last two on Sub Pop records) and an incredibly funny parody-ish self-help book, The Will to Whatevs. Named by Roling Stone as "Hot Twitterer," Eugene also keeps his 300k+ followers entertained daily.

Along with Julie Smith and Caroline Creaghead, Eugene produces what began as a joke and has become the hugely popular annual Eugene Mirman Comedy Festival, which happens every fall in Brooklyn, and is approaching its 7th year.

Eugene Mirman On Tour:2/5 - Carrboro, NC @ Cat's Cradle2/6 - Asheville, NC @ The Grey Eagle Tavern & Music Hall2/10 - Atlanta, GA @ Erikson Clock2/11 - Louisville, KY @ Headliners Music Hall2/13 - Lakewood, OH @ Mahall's 20 Lanes2/14 - Pittsburgh, PA @ Rex Theater2/15 - Ithaca, NY @ The Haunt

For more visit: http://eugenemirman.com/

Related Articles View More TV Stories