Update, 9:20 a.m. Saturday: Only Gators' Adam Silverstein, usually very much on point with Florida's uniforms, reports that the Gators are actually going with their traditional blue tops and white pants tonight.

Though Florida marketing is encouraging fans to wear orange, #Gators never announced such jerseys this week. UF will wear blue & white 2nite — OnlyGators.com (@onlygators) September 13, 2014

Update, 10:10 a.m. Saturday: Uniform Nation's since explained its reporting.

Earlier this week, a source informed us that Florida was planning to wear orange jerseys as part of a stadium-wide orange-out of Kentucky. — Uniforms Nation (@uniformsnation) September 13, 2014

However, the Gators have opted to stick with their standard home look for the game against UK: https://t.co/NB8GL3Bx0C — Uniforms Nation (@uniformsnation) September 13, 2014

I trust this source, but must note that Florida has the final say in what the team wears each Saturday, not my source. — Uniforms Nation (@uniformsnation) September 13, 2014

Original post follows.

Florida wears blue. Kentucky wears blue. But Florida wears orange, too — so there's something unusual for the Gators to do on Saturday against the Wildcats. And according to SB Nation's Uniform Nation, the Gators will wear orange jersey tops as part of their uniforms against Kentucky.

Florida breaking out orange jerseys against Kentucky: pic.twitter.com/Uw80lSOtkX — Uniform Nation (@sbnuniforms) September 9, 2014

Florida's worn orange jerseys three times since 2005:

In the 33-29 loss to LSU in 2010 depicted above

In the 41-3 win over Florida Atlantic that doubled as the opener of the Will Muschamp era in 2011

And in the 27-20 win over Louisiana in Florida's 2012 Homecoming game

Florida doesn't keep official records of uniform selection going back beyond 2005, but the Gators wore orange primary uniforms regularly prior to Steve Spurrier's arrival in Gainesville, with virtually all of Emmitt Smith's most memorable moments in Ben Hill Griffin Stadium coming in orange tops.

Florida might well give Kentucky quite a fright on Saturday night. Now, they will reportedly do so in shirts ready made for Halloween.