A lot has changed in the past year. We’ve renewed our focus on the core of Evernote to deliver major updates on every platform, from a redesigned Windows application to faster note-switching on Mac, new camera features on Android to sketching on iOS. We’ve begun rolling out improvements to the note editing experience, with more updates coming later this year. And new integrations with Google Drive and Outlook make it easier to manage work across apps. These changes are exciting, but we still have a long way to go to deliver the Evernote we envision.

Two things that won’t ever change are our commitment to making you as productive as you can be and running our business in as transparent a way as possible. No ads. No data selling. Just a great product at a fair price. So when it’s time to adjust our pricing, we want you to know what we’re doing, why, and what it means for you.

Beginning today, the prices for our Plus and Premium tiers will change for new subscriptions, and access from Evernote Basic accounts will be limited to two devices. Current subscribers and Basic users who are using more than two devices will have some time to adjust before the changes take effect. If you are impacted, look for a message from us in the coming days.

For more information about these changes, See our FAQ »

Building the Evernote of tomorrow

We don’t take any change to our pricing model lightly, and we never take you for granted. Our goal is to continue improving Evernote for the long-term, investing in our core products to make them more powerful and intuitive while also delivering often-requested new features. But that requires a significant investment of energy, time, and money. We’re asking those people who get the most value from Evernote to help us make that investment and, in return, to reap the benefits that result.

Evernote isn’t a vast corporation, and note-taking isn’t a sideline for us. It’s what we do, and we strive to do it better than anyone else. We hope you’ll continue to capture your thoughts and develop your ideas with us.

Here’s how Evernote’s pricing model will look moving forward (prices shown are in USD; regional pricing may vary):

Evernote Basic

Free

The easiest way to get started with Evernote, Basic has been and will remain free of charge. Evernote Basic supports web clipping and note sharing, so you can capture memories, ideas, and inspiration and save them forever.

On Basic, you can access notes on up to two devices, such as a computer and phone, two computers, or a phone and a tablet, as well as on the web, so you can continue to take your notes with you throughout your day. Passcode lock on the mobile app, formerly a paid feature, is now available on Basic as well.

Evernote Plus

$3.99/month or $34.99/year (save 27%)

To stay in sync across all your devices, consider Evernote Plus. You’ll also enjoy the ability to take notebooks offline on a mobile device, so your notes will be with you wherever you go, even when there’s no Internet connection. You can forward emails into Evernote and keep them alongside related notes, complete with attachments, and 1 GB of upload space each month means you can keep all your projects together.

Evernote Premium

$7.99/month or $69.99/year (save 27%)

Get the full power of Evernote with Evernote Premium, a set of tools designed to help you go paperless and take ideas into action across all your devices. Find text buried inside Office docs. Annotate PDFs. Discover connections between notes, turn business cards into phone contacts, or present your work with one click. Premium includes 10 GB of monthly upload space, and you have all the benefits of Plus and Basic, too.

UPDATE:

Many people have asked whether Evernote Web, accessed from a desktop browser, counts as a “device” for Evernote Basic. It does not. You can access Evernote via the web browser from as many computers as you like, even on a Basic account. For more information about how devices are counted, please refer to our Devices FAQ.

If you would like to discuss these changes, please visit our forum.