Search Engine Optimization involves several techniques that lead to a singular goal; helping your website rank high on the SERP (search engine ranking page) of different search engines. The most common practice is to keyword rank checking, which enables SEO experts and website owners to see how well their target keyword ranks in the search results of engines such as Google, Bing, Yahoo! and others.

Here is a list of some of the most widely used free Google keyword rank checker that you can use to check your keyword rankings and improve it to get ahead of the competition.

Related Post:

Free Google Position Checker Tools

Whether you are on your way to becoming a professional SEO analyst or working on optimizing your website by yourself, SEMRush will always be a valued addition to your arsenal. In order to get the information of the competitor website and the keywords they are targeting, just enter their URL into the search bar.

You can use this tool for finding the right keywords and checking their position, and if you find it as good as most do, you can purchase an SEMRush subscription as well.

While most SEO keyword tools are available in software packages for installation and use, their discontinued support or offline usage can be a bit tricky. With SEO SERP Workbench, you have a powerful SEO tool available as a Chrome Browser plugin. Downloaded by thousands of users, SSW offers support for several countries and much more.

In the world of SEO, Small SEO Tools has been a portal with several web-based tools that provide Search Engine Optimization techniques for free. The Keyword Position Tool provides the ability to check through multiple search engines, with the ability to check up to 20 keywords at a time.

If you are looking for a Google keyword research Tool that is designed to work with a particular location, the Keyword Rank Checker offered by SERPs.com is just the right fit. This tool supports up to a 100 countries as it is essentially a locality based tracking tool.

If you are handling more than just a handful of websites and need a position checking that can manage hundreds of domains at once, Wincher is just what you need. You get alerts and daily reports of your SEO project depending upon the criteria you have set up.

This free online tool for checking Google keyword position is dedicated to the most popularly used search engine. Google Rank Checker has an easy to use interface, all you need to do is insert the URL along with the keyword you wish to search.

While the mediocre user layout compared to other SEO tools makes Rank Checker from SEOCentro a wild choice, the performance of this tools makes it all worth it. With the support of multiple search engines such as Yahoo!, Bing, Google etc. you get all the details specifically about the keyword you wish to look up.

The Google Position Checker by Moonsy is yet another tool that focuses solely on Google search engine. The clean layout of the tool makes it easy to use, and it does not compromise on the features either. The functionality of the tool not only offers in-depth analysis of your keyword, but those of the competitor as well.

Similar to Small SEO Tools, SEOBook has also become a revered name in the SEO world, as it provides some top notch tools. Among the numerous tools their website provides, the most popular is the Firefox Browser extension known as Rank Checker. With personalized reporting, secure connection and easy interface, you won’t need an SEO company to look after your website.

This website provides a free keyword ranking position tool that is not only easy on the eyes, but efficient in functionality as well. The SEO Tool by KPMRS finds website ranks on Bing, Google, and Alexa, along with features such as checking backlinks, social popularity, and web audit.

The Google Rank Checker Tool by CuteRank has been around for years and is available in the form of downloadable software. With the ability to work with search engines such as Google, Bing, Ask, Yahoo! as well as AOL, you can track the keywords as well as batch check them.

The Google Keyword Rank Checker developed by AlloRank thrives to provide a richer user experience with the representation of real-time data and Analytics. You can look up the position of your targeted keywords with just a few clicks.

12 Free Google Position Checker Tools For Keywords 5 (100%) 2 votes (100%)votes

Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Reddit

Tumblr

Pinterest

LinkedIn

