The Jacksonville Armada finished its debut spring season in sixth place in the 11-team North American Soccer League, but the expansion team's campaign was anything but uneventful. A recap of the good, the bad and the unusual so far from the Armada's launch:

HIGHS

SUPER START

Jemal Johnson's long-range blast just 12 seconds after the April 4 kickoff against FC Edmonton didn't just spark the Armada to a 3-1 victory on Opening Day - it might have been the quickest first-ever goal by any team, anywhere in the world. And in front of a league-record crowd of 16,164, the goal set the stage for the wild ride to come. As Armada defender Matt Bahner said, "You can't really set a better tone than that."

BALL WIZARDRY

Jacksonville tied for third in the league with 15 goals, a tally that doesn't tell the whole story. The Armada's possession-based game often monopolized the ball for minutes on end, running circles around the opposing defense. The four primary attackers combined crisply and often brilliantly: Alhassane Keita with his explosive finishing in the box, Johnson with quickness and long-range shooting, Marcos Flores with ingenious ball skills and Pascal Millien with unrelenting energy and consistency. The mission for fall: Converting more of that possession into goals.

LAST-SECOND DRAMA

Nothing thrills the fans like a last-minute game-winner, and the Armada got exactly that May 2 at the Baseball Grounds. With the Armada heading for a 1-1 tie against the 2014 Soccer Bowl champion San Antonio Scorpions, Keita received a pass in the box and scored from 15 yards in stoppage time to ignite the crowd and lift the team three spots in the standings.

SURPRISE SPARK

Akeil Barrett wasn't even on the roster two weeks before the season's start, trying out with the club after his release by Major League Soccer's Orlando City. But the Jamaican rookie from the University of Tulsa quickly displayed his value as a second-half spark plug. He won over the crowd against San Antonio, when he dribbled through three men and set up Keita's game-winner just seven minutes after checking into the game. "He's learning a lot and giving us a little speed," Flores said.

BEST FOR LAST

Even down two goals in the spring season finale against the unbeaten New York Cosmos, the Armada didn't back down. The team fought back with Millien's pair of goals before Joseph Toby clinched a 3-3 draw on what might have been the team's best goal of the season - a direct volley from Millien's corner kick that thundered into the net.

LOWS

OLD DOMINION DEBACLE

The Armada picked a bad time for an all-around dismal performance May 27, a 3-0 loss at the United Soccer League's Richmond Kickers in the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup. That loss didn't just dump the club out of the cup against a third-level opponent. It also prevented a fourth-round home meeting with MLS' Columbus Crew, the kind of measuring-stick showdown that NASL clubs dream about. "It should definitely put a chip on our shoulders for next year," Bahner said. "We've got our feet wet and we'll know what to expect next time."

SCORING DROUGHT

When the goals dried up in late May and early June, the Armada was left grounded. In a 335-minute stretch spanning five games, the Armada pounded away but couldn't find the net. Not surprisingly, the drought coincided with a hamstring injury to Keita, which pulled Flores into a less comfortable center forward position and removed the Armada's penalty-area threat. Once the streak ended, though, the floodgates broke: Jacksonville proceeded to score three times in 31 minutes against New York.

PENALTY KICK EPIDEMIC

Armada defenders too often found themselves on the wrong side of the referee. In 11 games (10 in the NASL and one in the U.S. Open Cup), the club conceded five penalty kicks, leading to five goals. Plus, the club drew 26 yellow cards, tied with Tampa Bay for most in the league, and repeatedly gave up free kicks around the penalty area. That's a recipe for trouble on set plays, particularly considering the Armada's size disadvantage against most opponents. The main foul culprits? Center back Fabricio Ortiz drew a league-worst six yellow cards (plus a seventh against Richmond) and fellow Argentines Lucas Scaglia and Lucas Trejo were cautioned four times each.

INJURY BUG BITES

The Armada wasn't exactly ravaged by injuries, but the ones that did strike (Keita and Barrett with hamstring problems and Jaime Castrillon with a foot bone bruise) left a serious impact. And when regulars went down, the Armada's lack of depth was badly exposed. The trouble was most pronounced in midfield, where the club frequently used reserve defenders like Toby and Shawn Nicklaw out of position in more attacking roles. Strengthening the bench will be a key fall priority for general manager Dario Sala and the front office.

FLORIDA FLOUNDERING

State rivals 2 wins, Armada 0. Jacksonville's trips to Florida foes Fort Lauderdale and Tampa Bay both ended in close losses in the last 25 minutes, results that were even more frustrating because the Armada controlled much of the action. Late defensive lapses - Jacksonville allowed 18 goals, second-worst in the NASL - made the difference. The Armada's first shot at revenge comes with an Aug. 8 trip to Tampa Bay.

AND THE UNUSUAL …

CHANGE OF COMMAND

The Armada's unorthodox co-coaching experiment with Jose Luis Villarreal and Guillermo Hoyos began in January but didn't last long. After just six games, the Armada announced that Villarreal, who was named the club's first coach in June 2014, would leave the team for family reasons after the spring season. Hoyos now officially serves as sole head coach for the fall. It shouldn't be a big adjustment for the 52-year-old from Argentina with coaching experience on three continents, who handled game-day bench duties throughout the spring.

NOT BY THE BOOK - PART I

Goalkeeper Miguel Gallardo showed a risk threshold a few steps beyond that of mere mortals. How else to explain his periodic ventures 30 yards or more beyond his penalty area to clear loose balls with his head? Gallardo's daredevil style kept the Armada in several games but wasn't without its occasional hiccups, notably an own goal against New York when Cosmos star Raul caught him 10 yards from his goal line.

NOT BY THE BOOK - PART II

Even by the Armada's unconventional standards, it's hard to top the decision to play on with 10 men for a whopping 12 minutes against Indy on May 9, waiting for Keita to get stitches for a head wound rather than replacing him. "Keita's an important player and we were waiting for him to come back," Flores said. "Obviously, we tried to survive and not concede a goal during that period of time." Still, the short-handed Armada weathered the storm and went on to win 1-0.