10/1/2011 Update: This Datsun has been sold. Stay tuned for more BaT Exclusives!

From 9/23/2011:

This 1974 Datsun SSS-E Bluebird is a Japanese market model that was imported to the USA in 2007. It has 43k original kilometers according to the seller, so under 27k original miles. The car is all stock apart from fresh coil-overs professionally installed by Classic Datsun in Vista, Ca, and 15″ staggered Riverside wheels to match. All original parts are also included, so it could be returned to a stocker if desired. Just last week the car won the “Best 70’s Nissan” award at the recent Japanese Classic Car Show in Long Beach. It is available in San Marcos, California for $15k.

The car needs paint to be flawless, but looks very clean as-is. Brand new Kics wheel spacers are included if the buyer wants to fine-tune the wheel spacing. The wheels were restored and straightened, polished with new stainless steel hardware and fitted with brand new Hankook Ventus tires. Troy Ermish supplied the rear coil-overs and Design Products the front coil-overs on modified 280zx struts with Techno Toy camber plates.

The interior is a time capsule according to the seller, as good as the day it came off the factory floor. The car features factory air conditioning, a real rarity for Datsuns of this era. It also has a factory AM/FM radio and a wild, separate flat tape-deck.

The engine compartment is in very clean shape, and looks all factory apart from the new red-top Optima and the adjustable camber plates. The big air filter housing is spotless and feeds the L16’s factory Bosch fuel injection system. New fuel lines, front brake pads and an oil change were all recently done. The 5-speed transmission shifts nicely and the seller says that the car runs perfectly.

The impossible to find front grille chrome trim is also included and the seller says that it is part of a collection that does not get used enough.

Check out the additional photos of the car in the Flickr album and slide-show below.