So many people are always on the look out for new and interesting webseries. The feeling of being at the beginning to watch a great project take off, and be there for it to develop in real time all the way through is an awesome one.

However, it can often be very hard to seek these great projects out when they’re so young. Being new often means being undiscovered, and being undiscovered means just that. They aren’t going to come to you, you have to come to them.

But how do you find them? Well, one thing someone can do to increase their odds of stumbling upon something great at the beginning is simply making some friends and connections in the community. Search out some communities, join some Discord chats. What your new friends find and even create themselves will be shared with you. This community is rather scarce and spread out at times, leaving the best option to be networking and forming relationships for many things.

So, that wraps back around in to what you’re here for. Here are a few new and fresh webseries that are just now starting out, as of the time this article was written. Obviously, this article will fall out of date eventually. But even if you’re coming in from the future, I highly recommend checking these channels out, even if they aren’t so new and untouched anymore.

This list is in no particular order. Each project has me in so different of a way it would be hard to rank them even if I wanted to.

Factors Of Zero

Channel link: Here

Videos so far: 2

Subscriber count so far: 125

While 125 subscribers is a pretty low number in terms of YouTube popularity, it’s nothing to sneeze at with only two videos on your account. Creator Aidan Elliott has roped people in with an interesting premise; this is not an ARG, it is an RG, a Reality Game. What this means is this webseries is based on the reality of Aidan Elliott itself, and it may or may not blend with fiction as time goes on.

He’s upfront with the fact that he could very well be lying to you at any moment about this idea as well, blending the trope of an unreliable narrator with the already immersive platform that is an alternate reality experience.

Video uploads are slow, but don’t let this discourage you from following this project. There is also a Tumblr blog associated with this project with secrets of its own, and the inbox is open as well. This is something you can sink your teeth in to for sure, and I anxiously await the next upload.

Synthetic Wool/The Zhuangzi Game

Channel link: Here

Videos so far: 6

Subscriber count so far: 101

Synthetic Wool, at first glance, is a new Let’s Play channel playing a game you’ve never heard about before. It somewhat resembles Minecraft, but not exactly. The game being shown here is very strange, and as the uploads progress things get even more peculiar. Huh, there seems to be a download link in the description…

The Zhuangzi game wastes no time showing you it’s potential. Out of all the projects on this list I’d say this one shows the most of it so far. Running themes are already there to find, and there’s more content than what appears on the surface.

Deadlift Moving Co

Channel link: Here

Videos so far: 18

Subscriber count so far: 52

Deadlift Moving Co, so far, is pretty much just a group of college age kids goofing off. But it’s this attention to spending so much time getting us attached to the characters that makes me enjoy it.

It’s taking time acquainting you with the folks involved in the story before really launching in to it, which I think a lot of webseries could use. To be honest, if I hadn’t have talked to a creator of this project, I may not even believe it to be a series at first glance. So go give them some love and hop along for the ride, they deserve it. If you’re patient and like stories beginning in a slice-of-life manner, this is for you.

I suck very much at ending my thoughts in a manner that feels good to read, so sorry if this feels abrupt here. Go check out all these series, as they deserve as much appreciation as possible, and enjoying being along for the ride.