In this blog post I think I will talk to you a bit about what you can do to create a new mind set that will rule your everyday life and create in side of you a shining light that can transcend to those around you.

Many times when I was growing up I used to read a lot of books about science fiction stuff. In those books were many great inventions that gave man better powers of awareness. One such power was (ESP) extra sensory perception. The power to know things people were thinking or what was coming in the future. I used to sit and dream as to how cool it would be to have such a power. Later on in life I was to find that those skills truly did exist in real people beyond the page of fantasy. I was amazed and thought how did these amazing people ever achieve such powers. Had they fallen into some vat of toxic waste or done some experiment that altered their minds perception.

The answer was none of these things the extra ordinary truth behind these people’s skills was to come to me like a bullet. The truth that we, (you and I) the entire human race are not only capable of these skills of the mind but that we or most people in the human race never use them. We never seek to attain enlightenment as to what the positive mind truly can create. We let that skill along with many others the extraordinary mind has to offer fade away.

The fact is that if a skill is not used it does not disappear however it becomes week and lazy.

The mind puts it away making room for the skills that seem more dominant as to use everyday. So many of us go around never realizing how truly amazing we are and the power in ourselves that lie dormant waiting to be sparked into life.

It was said the more you seek and use a skill or power of the mind the stronger the skill comes to be and can be a dominating skill. So if we as thinking men and women can truly believe this by seeing that education broadens the mind and makes us think and do things better as to the knowledge of forming great thoughts and projecting great ideas out ward then we can truly understand that the skill of being able to project are will and wants lie deep with in us and in awakening them we can draw to our selves information from those around us well projecting out ward our desires that can produce wealth and success.

It goes the same with love and spirituality we have these factors waiting to be used and released in side to bring to us anything we want. Napoleon Hill stated if the mind can perceive it than it can be gained in the physical and the metaphysical. So it was in that faith I have looked at the ways those amazing people have honed there extra sensory perception to help them become successful in all they do.

The first thing is they have cleared all negatives from their minds and have created an immovable vision in their minds as to what they want out of life. Then they have built a impenetrable force field of will as to stopping anyone who would seek to destroy their goals and dreams. Simply put they do not allow any thoughts that do not project positives out in to the world in to their frame of thinking. This skill is very much attainable.

However it takes work to achieve and it takes time to get it right like any muscle that has not been used for a while it needs to be worked and reworked till it grows strong. Remember your mind is the biggest muscle your body has and it needs to be worked and worked again by gaining knowledge and concepts of a positive nature every single day. The whole idea of understanding people and life is ingrained in us we can feel the air yet we do not see it how ever it fills are lungs and blows the trees so we know it exists. The power of thinking ourselves in to a better life also is there.

In order to reawaken this power we must reawaken our desires to attain a positive mind and then work on that. If this takes place then we you and I can achieve great things with but a thought and are wills can and will be reality and create success.

Please check out our links to the right.

Mark & Tammy Cowell

Advertisements