Gothic Architecture spans multiple game systems. From Vampire Castles to Medieval Cathedrals and the Interstellar Empires of the far future.

Rampage Gothic is a 28mm Scenery Building System, designed for Wargames and Role Playing Games. Each pledge is delivered as an STL file pack to print on your home 3D printer.

Rampage Gothic uses OpenLOCK to lock the pieces in place and top locking pins so building levels can stack. Rampage Gothic is fully backwards compatible with all Rampage Dungeons and Rampage Castles.

Rampage Gothic comes in two main pledges; Gothic Cathedral and Gothic Industrial. Each pledge gets you a set of 3D printable models and the stretch goals related to that pledge. If you pledge the All-In pledge or the All-In Early Bird pledge, you will also get the bonus items for free. See each pledge for details.

PLEDGE US48 The Gothic Cathedral contains all the elements you need to build and create your Gothic Cathedral or Gothic Castle. This includes a full set of OpenLOCK compatible walls and floors

Includes the stretch goals in the left column

Delivered November 2017

Interior with Medieval floors

Cathedral shown with flying buttress from the second Cathedral stretch goal

PLEDGE US48 The Gothic Industrial is a set of Sci-Fi OpenLOCK Walkways and Modular Plasma Stacks. You can use them as 'stand-alone' or to create multiple complex structures. You can also combine them with the Gothic Cathedral.

Includes the stretch goals in the right column

Delivered November 2017

The image below shows how the stretch goals (Archways and Walls) connect into the walkways

Below you can see the Blast Walls (Part of the 1st Sci-Fi Stretch goal) and how they connect to the F and E Tiles.

4" & 2" high walkways with connecting ladders

31 Free Stretch goals already unlocked!!!!

The free stretch goals are a big part of our Kickstarters. The more stretch goals we hit, the more models you will get.

The bonus items are free with the All-In pledge, and we will be adding more of these as the campaign progresses. So let us know what you are looking for, and we will start making bonus items.

The Dwarven Floors bonus item is a complete set of Dwarven style floor tiles

The walking hut bases will accommodate any square building as they can be scaled before printing.

NOTE: The hut shown above is not included in the free bonus Items

The necromancer Pulpit

Printable window inserts

To claim an add, you need to add the total amount to the pledge. When the campaign closes, you will be sent a pledge manager to select the add-ons.

Old Stone House

The Dice tower is based on our Winterdale War Tower

Add-Ons from previous campaigns

All Rampage tiles will have the latest OpenLOCK TRP Upgrade

Rampage Complete Dungeons - add NZ$120 (US$88) view files

Rampage Complete Dungeons

Rampage Complete Castle add NZ$95NZ (US$69) view files

Rampage Castle Add-On

Rampage Mashups are add-ons. We have made the Mashups from existing Rampage tiles. They have been combined in the 3d Application so that they will print as solid levels. You can construct these from previous collections.

There are 7 Mashups. To get all the Mashups add $104 NZ (US 80)

At Printable Scenery we are perfectionists. Our models have been recognised as the best on the market, and we have won international awards for The Rampage OpenLOCK System. We focus on organic details, and we make sure the models look good on the table

Rampage Gothic uses OpenLOCK the most widely used Open Source scenery building system in the world. OpenLOCK is the only modular system that allows you to connect walls to floors and it's always backwards compatible. So now your Dungeon Tiles, Fortresses, Spaceships and Castles will connect to Cathedrals and Sci-Fi walkways

To be sure of compatibility look for the OpenLOCK logo

Rampage uses OpenLOCK

So support us now so we can keep on producing the best 3D printable scenery on all the worlds

TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

When you contribute to This campaign, you will receive STL files for the models as per your selected pledge. The pledge files will be delivered November 2017, with successful stretch goals arriving later.

You can print these files for your personal use, but you may not sell the printed items or distribute the digital 3D models. We are happy for you to print and sell the models to your friends and club members, but you can't go into business selling the models for profit or publicly advertise that you print and sell the models.

Please read our terms and conditions on the Printable Scenery website.