THE LEFTOVERS: THE COMPLETE FIRST SEASON Blu-ray And DVD Release Details

Warner Bros. Home Entertainment has announced the home video release of HBO’s thought-provoking series THE LEFTOVERS: THE COMPLETE FIRST SEASON, arriving on Blu-ray and DVD on October 6th. Head inside for the details!

From WBHE:

BURBANK, CA (June 18, 2015) – From Damon Lindelof, the co-creator of the hit series Lost, and acclaimed Oscar®-nominated novelist Tom Perrotta, Warner Bros. Home Entertainment brings the thought-provoking new HBO series The Leftovers to Blu-ray and DVD for the first time.Renewed for a second season,, this enticing new series captivated audiences with one of HBO’s strongest premieres of 2014. The series averaged over 2.5 million total viewers* and is the first Warner Bros. Television show ever to air on the HBO network. With the stellar starring cast of Justin Theroux (Mulholland Drive), Amy Brenneman (Private Practice), Christopher Eccelston (Thor: The Dark World), Liv Tyler (The Lord of the Rings films), Chris Zylka (The Amazing Spider-Man 2), Margaret Qualley (Palo Alto), Carrie Coon (Law & Order: Special Victims Unit), Emily Meade (Gimme Shelter), Amanda Warren (The Closer), Ann Dowd (Masters of Sex), Michael Gaston (The Mentalist), Max Carver (Desperate Housewives), Charlie Carver (Desperate Housewives) and Annie Q (Are We There Yet?), the series was created by Lindelof and Tom Perrotta (Little Children), with Lindelof, Perrotta, Peter Berg (Lone Survivor, Friday Night Lights) and Sarah Aubrey (Lone Survivor, Friday Night Lights) executive producing. The Leftovers: The Complete First Season from Warner Bros. Home Entertainment will be available on Blu-ray and DVD on October 6, 2015 for $44.96 / $39.98 SRP.

Based on the 2011 bestselling novel by Perrotta, The Leftovers is seen primarily through the eyes of police chief Kevin Garvey, played by Justin Theroux, as he experiences life post “the Departure.” After what can only be explained as an instance similar to the biblical rapture, the people of Mapleton, New York, are suddenly shaken to their core as many of their loved ones disappear into thin air. With roughly 140 million people actively missing — 2% of the world’s population — the world starts to question everyone and everything. Will people turn to cynicism, paranoia, and cult-like fanaticism, in order to survive? The eerie and thought-provoking series leaves viewers riveted, second-guessing theories from episode to episode.

“With the third strongest series premiere for HBO in 2014, we know fans are just as excited as we are to add The Leftovers: The Complete First Season to their collection.” said Rosemary Markson, WBHE Senior Vice President, Television Marketing. “Fans who were already hooked as well as those soon-to-be can now catch up or relive the mystery prior to the season two premiere.”

The Leftovers: The Complete First Season on Blu-ray and DVD includes all 10, hour-long episodes:

1 Pilot

2 Penguin One, Us Zero

3 Two Boats and a Helicopter

4 B.J. and the A.C

5 Gladys

6 Guest

7 Solace for Tired Feet

8 Cairo

9 The Garveys at Their Best

10 The Prodigal Son Returns

Special Features:

▪ Pilot Audio Commentary

▪ Making The Leftovers

▪ I Remember: A Season One Conversation with Damon Lindelof and Tom Perrotta

▪ Secrets of the Guilty Remnant

▪ Beyond the Book: A Look Ahead at Season 2

▪ Finale Audio Commentary