The first integrated residential community dedicated to autism is set to open its doors in the country by early 2018.

A Special Place—modeled after several residential communities in the United States—was originally conceived as a residential haven for autism community living. It will also accommodate persons of special needs other than autism, and other family members who wish to reside within the community.

ADVERTISEMENT

A Special Place is the keystone project of the Association for Adults with Autism Philippines (AAAP), which seeks to advance the welfare of adults with autism—a much ignored segment of the autism population.

Set to rise in a 9,000-sqm lot in Alfonso, Cavite, A Special Place will offer a safe, nurturing, and sustainable community where adult children can thrive, maximize their abilities, enjoy an appropriate level of independence, and receive health, educational, vocational, and wellness services.

The said project is expected to have a total of six homes, each of which will be supported round-the-clock by professionally trained staff and supervised by a resident house-parent.

The project is also expected to provide facilities for work, educational, vocational, and recreational activities, as well as opportunities for undertaking collaborative work with local and international scientists dedicated to autism and special needs research.

Phase 1 of the project will see the construction of the first residential home and a second building for administrative, therapeutic, and research-oriented activities.

Phase 2 will roll out the building of five additional homes and, as needed, senior care residential facilities for parents of autistic and special needs adult children.

The operation of A Special Place will be supervised by the board of trustees of AAAP, which is composed of parents of persons with autism.

A Special Place is now accepting e-mail applications for adults, 18 to 50 years old, diagnosed with autism and special needs. For more information about A Special Place, please email aspecialplace.alfonso@gmail.com or call Christine Siruelo at 09178812836.

ADVERTISEMENT

Read Next

LATEST STORIES

MOST READ