"He says he loves Mexico and he says he's going to get all of the Mexican votes, so God Bless him. But it is an issue and we thought we would have a Donald Trump piñata contest," says Rico Neller. He is the co-chairman of the annual Latino Fest in downtown Toledo.

Presidential candidate and entrepreneur, Donald Trump is used to taking blows in the press and in business. And now he will be taking blows from some in the Toledo area Latino community this Labor Day Weekend.

Because of his recent comments about immigration, Latino leaders in the Glass City had four piñatas specially made for the festival.

Neller continues, "These are people too. People crossing the border to avoid conflict and if you are talking about a wall on Mexico, which I think is absurd, why are you leaving out Canada. That’s a border too, in fact it is twice as long. It sounds racist. Hopefully, he's not. Give him the benefit of the doubt."

Latino leaders here say there are over 35,000 Latinos living in the greater Toledo area, and less than five percent of those are what they call "undocumented". They also say this Donald Trump piñata is their lighthearted way of literally poking fun at not such a lighthearted issue.

"Most Hispanics, not just Mexicans, they're upset," says Neller. "This was more tongue and cheek, though. Try to be as optimistic as we can." He continues, "I think people are very pro immigrant. They understand the US was built on immigration and the people have a lot of positive contributions. And I think Donald Trump even realizes it, but he is using some of these statements that at times are contradictory, to rustle up some support."

Local republicans agree. We reached out to the Trump Campaign and haven't received a comment yet. We were able to contact Jon Stainbrook, Chair of the Lucas County Republican Party by phone.

"Donald Trump, by hitting a lot of these hot button issues, and talking about them, is stirring the pot and bringing a lot of attention to the presidential election," says Stainbrook. "He's upset some people and he's made other people very happy. To me, this is another freedom of speech issue and they are fine to do it and it is their right."