Get the biggest daily news stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

ISIS is planning to provoke a final battle with the West by killing thousands of people in a new atrocity.

The terror group claims have to hundreds of militants in countries in Europe and the US ready to take action on its command.

The warning, made by a respected analyst, comes amid heightened security across Europe amid fears of a New Year's Eve terror attack.

This year has seen several horrifying terror attacks of varying scales across the West and the rest of the globe, including two atrocities in Paris.

Analyst Dr Theodore Karasik, told the Express: "ISIS’s media operation is taunting its enemy to come to fight their Final Battle.

"But first, it wants to show its global reach with zeal...from cells, to lone wolves, to bedroom jihadists – to target landmarks and crowds in dozens of countries across the world."

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

"There are close to 40 ISIS affiliates globally with millions of adherents and believers around the world. The New Year may ring in with disturbing terror attacks.

Islamic State chief Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi has called on all Muslims to rise up and overthrow Israel and the West.

However, the terrorist leader may find himself a little disappointed with how his call to arms has worked out.

In a rare message, issued by ISIS chiefs, he said Muslims should "urgently" join the terror organisation.

He added: "Rise up against the apostate tyrants, and avenge your people in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen."

But Muslims on social media were quick to laugh off the message after portions of the message were tweeted out by pro-democracy activist Iyad El Baghdadi, meaning much of the abuse was directed at the similarly named Arab campaigner.

Meanwhile, ISIS militants are said to be selling women off at £15,000 each, and children at £10,000.

The slaves are sold after being stolen from families across Syria and Iraq, where ISIS holds significant territory.

It is believed that 7,000 women and children were taken recently from Sinjar in northern Iraq by fighters following an attack earlier this year.

Pictures are taken by the ISIS monsters of the newly-captured slaves, which are then circulated on messaging applications such as What's App.