The city of Akron will pay tribute to one of its favorite creative sons when it presents the key to the city to artist and DEVO founder Mark Mothersbaugh on Saturday, May 28, at the Akron-Summit County Public Library.

The 2 p.m. ceremony is in conjunction with the opening of “Mark Mothersbaugh: Myopia,” complementary exhibitions of his work that runs concurrently at the Akron Art Museum and the Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland.

“It is a privilege to honor such a gifted Akron native in this way,” said Akron mayor Dan Horrigan in a May 16 news release announcing the ceremony. “Mark has shone a spotlight on the creative and innovative spirit of our city.”

The May 28 event the Akron library, 60 S. High St., also will feature a conversation with Mothersbaugh and “Myopia” curator Adam Lerner. Tickets, available online, are required and cost $10 for Akron Art Museum and MOCA Cleveland members and $20 for nonmembers.

Following the talk, “Myopia” opens at the Akron Art Museum, 1 S. High St., with a free celebration featuring Mothersbaugh, music and art activities. The exhibit opens Friday, May 27, at MOCA Cleveland, 11499 Euclid Ave., with a free party starting at 7:30 p.m. Mothersbaugh and a DJ will perform on Toby’s Plaza in front of the museum.

“Myopia” spans more than four decades of the Akron native’s career as a visual artist, musician and composer, and includes paper works, sculptures, installations, music and videos. The Akron Art Museum and MOCA Cleveland collaborated on the exhibitions and will each showcase a different aspects of Mothersbaugh’s work, according to the release.

Both venues will present visual and sound work, but each will have its own emphasis. MOCA Cleveland will focus more strongly on sound, and works will include early performance photographs and film (including photos of Mothersbaugh as his DEVO alter-ego, Booji Boy), manipulated musical instruments and excerpts from his soundtracks for film and TV.

In Akron, the exhibition will focus on Mothersbaugh’s visual art, including an installation of 30,000 postcard-sized drawings, mirror-image photographs and “Roly-Poly” ceramic sculptures.

“Myopia” runs through Aug. 28 at both venues.