New Eagles wide receiver Alshon Jeffery (still feels good typing that) penned a piece for The Player’s Tribune on Friday afternoon. In it, he talks about how it was tough moving on from the Bears, but he also looks forward to his new home in Philadelphia.

The best part of Jeffery’s letter, though, is clearly this story about his first interaction with Carson Wentz (bold emphasis mine).

I’m excited to play with Carson Wentz, too. I thought Carson was legit the first time I saw him play, when the Eagles came to Soldier Field in Week 2 last season. I remember being on the sideline waiting to get back onto the field, and watching him make plays. I didn’t really think much of it at the time because it was his only second game, and I was thinking about what we needed to do as an offense to get into the end zone. But I remember thinking for a quick second, Man, this kid can do some things. As the season went on and he kept playing better, I thought that someday he was gonna be a legit MVP contender. I think he has that kind of talent. I actually told him that the other day. He and I were texting back and forth after the news broke that I was coming to Philly. I told him that I felt like he was good enough to win an MVP someday, and that it was going to be my job to help him win it. He straight up said he didn’t care about being MVP. He wanted to win a championship.

So it turns out Jeffery wasn’t just joking earlier when he said he believed Wentz will be the NFL’s Most Valuable Player one day. And it’s incredibly on brand for Wentz to not care about that and only care about winning.

Eagles fans, this could be the beginning of a beautiful relationship between a franchise quarterback and a star No. 1 wide receiver. Something to be very excited about.

Jeffery also talked about how he watched Invincible recently and it made him think how Eagles fans will react when he’s scoring touchdowns in Philadelphia.

I actually just watched the movie Invincible a couple of months ago. You remember that scene where Mark Wahlberg scores a touchdown at the old Veterans Stadium, and he holds his arms out to celebrate, and all you can see in front of him are the fans going nuts and wearing that old-school Eagles green and white.

Welcome to Philly, Alshon. People are going to love you here.