COLUMBUS -- The latest on reports regarding the attack at Ohio State University:

6:30 a.m. Wednesday, Nov. 30:

President-elect Donald Trump tweets about ISIS claiming responsibility. "ISIS is taking credit for the terrible stabbing attack at Ohio State University by a Somali refugee who should not have been in our country."

ISIS is taking credit for the terrible stabbing attack at Ohio State University by a Somali refugee who should not have been in our country. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 30, 2016

7:35 p.m.



A leader of a Somali community association says a man who launched a car-and-knife attack at Ohio State University drove his siblings to school as normal beforehand.

Hassan Omar says Abdul Artan's mother said she didn't know anything was wrong until police showed up at her door.

Omar said Tuesday the mother told him nothing seemed different about her son, who she said was enjoying his education.

Artan was a Muslim who prayed daily and stewed over the treatment of fellow Muslims.

Sign up for Take 10, the WBIR lunchtime newsletter Thank You Something went wrong. Get the news you need to know, plus weather and something to make you smile, every weekday in your inbox! Thank you for signing up for the Take 10 Newsletter Please try again later.

Submit

Omar says he was shocked by Monday's attack because of the amount of effort the community puts into preventing people from being radicalized.

Democratic U.S. Rep. Adam Schiff is a House Intelligence Committee member and says he's seen no evidence Artan communicated with overseas terror organizations.

Artan was killed by police.

4:30 p.m.

A union official says the officer who killed a man to stop an attack at Ohio State University responded according to his training and is grateful for the outpouring of support he's received from fellow police and the public.

Local police union president Jason Pappas says university officer Alan Horujko is on paid administrative leave. Pappas says standard procedure requires that the 28-year-old officer see a psychologist and get a new firearm before he gets back to work.

Officials say Horujko was nearby when a Somalia-born student plowed a car into a group of pedestrians Monday morning and began stabbing people with a butcher knife. Police say the officer shot the driver in less than a minute.

3:40 p.m.:

Business Insider reports that ISIS has claimed responsibility for the attack. Amaq, the unofficial ISIS news agency, issued a statement Tuesday calling suspect Abdul Razak Ali Artan one of its soldiers. Artan is believed to have posted strong thoughts on the treatment of Muslims to his Facebook page, noting that he was, "Sick and tired of seeing my fellow Muslim brothers and sisters being killed and tortured EVERYWHERE."

3 p.m.:

Ohio State officials held a news conference on campus to provide an update on the 11 victims from the attack.

William Clark, a professor who was hit by the vehicle Artan was driving, told reporters he suffered several bruises and cuts when he was flipped into the air by the car.

You can watch the press conference from WKYC Channel 3's Facebook Live below:

12:45 p.m.:

The director of a mosque attended by the Ohio State attacker says numerous programs are in place to help youth and prevent self-radicalization, according to the Associated Press. Horsed Noah says he wasn't familiar with Abdul Razak Ali Artan, the OSU student born in Somalia who police say carried out the car-and-knife rampage that left 11 people hurt Monday morning.

Noah says thousands can attend services on busy days at the mosque on Columbus' west side. The mosque just celebrated its second anniversary and serves mostly Muslims from Somalia and other East African countries, many of whom live nearby.

Noah mentors youth at the mosque, which also offers "Meet a Muslim" programs and helps Somali parents learn to communicate with their children, especially as they assimilate faster to life in America.

10:30 a.m.:

Did terrorist propaganda inspire Ohio State campus attack?

6 a.m. Tuesday, Nov. 29, 2016:

11:30 p.m.:

The suspect in an attack at Ohio State that left 11 injured has been linked to Dallas, according to Catholic Charities. This comes from a report by our TEGNA sister station WFAA.

Catholic Charities confirmed Abdul Razak Ali Artan briefly stayed at their shelter in Dallas.

Artan was born in Somalia and living in the United States as a legal permanent resident. He later enrolled at Columbus State Community College from the fall semester of 2014 through the summer semester of 2016, according to college spokesman Allen Kraus.

He graduated with an Associate of Arts degree in the spring of 2016 and then took a non-credit class for summer 2016. He had no record of behavioral or disciplinary issues during his time at Columbus State and graduated with honors, Kraus added.

Monday night, Texas Gov. Greg Abbott wrote a Tweet in response to Artan's background:

This is why I removed Texas from the Refugee Relocation Process. I will not be an accomplice to importing terrorists. Refugee reform needed https://t.co/6ZadOgR6KE — Greg Abbott (@GregAbbott_TX) November 29, 2016

11:00 p.m.:

WKYC Channel 3's Russ Mitchell spent some time with OSU student Armand Ghazi, who witnessed the attack and called 911. Watch Russ' interview below:

10:00 p.m.:

A short time ago, students, faculty and staff gathered at a church near the scene of this morning's attack...to pray for the victims, and the community. WKYC Channel 3's Amani Abraham was there and filed this report:

7:50 p.m.

Republican Vice President-elect Mike Pence says his team's "hearts go out to the families of those affected" by a car-and-knife attack at Ohio State University.

Authorities say a student plowed his car into a group of pedestrians on campus and then got out and began stabbing people with a butcher knife Monday before he was shot to death by a campus police officer. Police are investigating whether it was a terrorist attack. Eleven people were hurt.

Pence calls the episode "a tragic attack." He spoke in New York at Trump Tower, where President-elect Donald Trump lives.

Pence says their "prayers are with" all the victims and first responders.



6:30 p.m.:

Leaders of mosques and Muslim organizations in Ohio say they're heartbroken and strongly condemn an attack at Ohio State University that has left 11 people injured.

University officials and police say a man who drove a car into pedestrians and began stabbing people on campus Monday before being shot and killed by police was a student. The university's student newspaper ran an interview in August with a student with the same name identifying himself as a Muslim.

A U.S. official who wasn't authorized to talk about the case has told The Associated Press on the condition of anonymity the man was born in Somalia and was a legal permanent resident of the U.S.

Law enforcement officials are investigating the attacker's motivations and background.

5:45 p.m.:

Ohio State officials have announced that classes will resume on Tuesday.

UPDATE: All classes on the Columbus campus will resume normal schedule as of Tuesday, November 29th. — OSU Emergency Mngmnt (@OSU_EMFP) November 28, 2016

5:20 p.m.:



The top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee says the attack at Ohio State "bears all of the hallmarks of a terror attack carried out by someone who may have been self-radicalized."

U.S. Rep. Adam Schiff of California says law enforcement officials are still investigating the attacker's motivations and background.

On Monday morning, an OSU student plowed his car into pedestrians on campus and then got out and began stabbing people with a butcher knife. A police officer shot him to death in a matter of minutes.

The attacker was identified as Abdul Razak Ali Artan. A U.S. official who wasn't authorized to talk about the case told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity that Artan was born in Somalia and was a legal permanent resident of the U.S.

4:25 p.m.:

The Associated Press reports authorities said the officer who killed an attacker at Ohio State University was a university police officer who'd been on the job for less than two years.

Department of Public Safety Director Monica Moll identified the officer as 28-year-old Alan Horujko. She says he started on the Ohio State police force in January 2015.

Ohio State Police Chief Craig Stone says it was fortunate there was a nearby gas leak that the officer had gone to investigate. Stone says it helped position Horujko to respond to the attack so quickly.

Those injured in the attack included an Ohio State faculty member, four graduate students and three undergrads.

Authorities say they were able to get photos of the suspect's vehicle driving onto campus and confirmed only one person was in the car.

The @OSUPolice confirm Officer Alan Horujko shot and killed

the suspect, Abdul Razak Ali Artan, Monday morning. (OFFICER PHOTO ATTACHED) pic.twitter.com/i1skmuLqCb — OSU Emergency Mngmnt (@OSU_EMFP) November 28, 2016

4:10 p.m.:

A director of public safety says a man who drove a car into pedestrians and began stabbing people at Ohio State was a student at the school.

Ohio State Department of Public Safety Director Monica Moll also identified the now-deceased suspect as Abdul Razak Ali Artan.

A U.S. official earlier told The Associated Press that he was born in Somalia and living in the United States as a legal permanent resident. The official wasn't authorized to publicly discuss details of the ongoing case and spoke to the AP on condition of anonymity.

Authorities say Artan was shot to death by a police officer Monday morning shortly after he drove up onto a curb into pedestrians, got out of the car and began stabbing people with a butcher knife.

Nine people were injured, including one critically.

3:20 p.m.:

A U.S. official has identified the suspect in the Ohio State attack that injured nine people as a man of Somali descent.

The official identified Abdul Razak Ali Artan as the now-deceased suspect. He was born in Somalia and living in the United States as a legal permanent resident. It was unclear when Artan came to the U.S.

The official wasn't authorized to publicly discuss details of the ongoing case and spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity.

A second law enforcement official confirmed that authorities believe the suspect's name is Abdul Artan. That official also wasn't authorized to publicly discuss details of the ongoing case and spoke on condition of anonymity.

Authorities say the suspect was shot to death Monday by a police officer after driving up onto a curb and into pedestrians and attacking people with a knife.

3 p.m.:

The Associated Press reports a police chief says authorities are looking into whether the attack at Ohio State University was related to terrorism.

Columbus Police Chief Kim Jacobs was asked at a news conference Monday afternoon whether authorities were considering the possibility that it was a terror attack.

Jacobs says, "I think we have to consider that it is."

Authorities say a man purposely plowed his car over a curb and into pedestrians on Monday morning before jumping out of the car and attacking people with a butcher knife. A police officer who was nearby because of an earlier gas leak was on the scene in a minute and shot and killed the attacker.

The FBI and other agencies joined the investigation.

Authorities say nine people were hurt, one of them critically.

1:50 p.m.:

The AP reports witness to an attack at Ohio State University says he initially thought a car had driven over a curb into pedestrians accidentally but realized it was intentional when a man emerged with a butcher knife.

Student Martin Schneider says he saw the attack take place Monday morning.

He says he saw the attacker hit several people with the car, then emerge swinging the knife.

Schneider says the attacker didn't say anything.

He says he heard the car's engine revving before it hit the curb because it was going pretty fast. He says he also heard yells from a frightened crowd.

1:20 p.m.:

The AP reports authorities are now saying nine people were injured at Ohio State University when an attacker purposely drove over a curb and into pedestrians and then got out of the vehicle and began stabbing people with a butcher knife.

Ohio State Police Chief Craig Stone says eight of the victims are in stable condition and one victim is in critical condition after the attack Monday.

Authorities said two people had been stabbed, four people had been hurt by a car and two others were treated for lacerations.

The injuries to the ninth person weren't immediately clear.

Earlier, hospital officials said that eight people had non-life-threatening injuries.

Stone says an officer who was nearby because of an earlier gas leak shot and killed the male suspect.



1:10 p.m.:

The AP reports Ohio State police say the attacker on campus purposely drove over a curb and into pedestrians and then got out of the vehicle and began stabbing people with a butcher knife.

Police Chief Craig Stone spoke early Monday afternoon at a news conference.

Authorities also said police believe that there was only one attacker.

Ohio State said earlier that the suspect had been shot and killed.

The university had sent out a series of tweets at around 10 a.m. Monday saying there was an active shooter on campus and that shooters should run, hide or fight. About an hour and a half later, the university said a shelter-in-place warning had been lifted and the scene was secure.

Authorities said later that it doesn't appear that the suspect used a gun in the attack.

12:15 p.m.:

The AP reports a spokesman for Ohio State University says injuries in the attack on campus included stab wounds and being struck by a vehicle.

Ben Johnson said Monday that there were also other injuries that were being evaluated.

12:05 p.m:

The AP reports hospital officials say eight patients they received from the scene of a reported attack at Ohio State University have non-life-threatening injuries.

The eight patients were split among OSU Wexner Medical Center, OhioHealth Grant Medical Center and OhioHealth Riverside Methodist Hospital.

12 p.m.:

An Akron man who attends Ohio State University recounted what he experienced on campus:

11:35 a.m.:

Ohio State University says a shelter-in-place warning has been lifted and the scene is secure following reports of an active shooter, the AP reports.

Ohio State tweeted Monday morning that all classes would be canceled for the rest of the day.

11:10 a.m.:

The suspect linked to an active shooter situation on the Ohio State campus is dead, police authorities confirm to our sister station WCMH.

Eight people were taken to the hospital, the station reports.

WCMH reports that seven victims are in stable condition, while another person is in critical condition.

Another person is receiving treatment on scene, the station said.

10:30 a.m.

The AP reports Ohio State University is telling students there's an active shooter on campus and they should "Run Hide Fight."

Ohio State's official Twitter page retweeted a post from OSU Emergency Management saying there is an active shooter on campus in Columbus on Monday morning.

The tweet says: "Buckeye Alert: Active Shooter on campus. Run Hide Fight. Watts Hall. 19th and College." Watts Hall is a materials science and engineering building.

"Run, hide, fight" is standard protocol for active shooter situations. It means: Run, evacuate if possible; Hide, get silently out of view; or Fight, as a last resort, take action to disrupt or incapacitate the shooter if your life is in imminent danger.

A Columbus police dispatcher declined to comment on the reports, but police vehicles were seen at the scene.

10 a.m:

Several tweets were posted by OSU around 10 a.m. Monday regarding the situation:

"Run Hide Fight," one of the tweets declared.

Buckeye Alert: Active Shooter on campus. Run Hide Fight. Watts Hall. 19th and College. — OSU Emergency Mngmnt (@OSU_EMFP) November 28, 2016

Buckeye Alert: Continue to shelter in place. Avoid area of College. More information to follow. — OSU Emergency Mngmnt (@OSU_EMFP) November 28, 2016

Buckeye Alert: Continue to shelter in place in north campus area. Follow directions of Police on scene. — OSU Emergency Mngmnt (@OSU_EMFP) November 28, 2016

The Lantern, Ohio State's student news organization, is posting photos from campus on Twitter (MOBILE USERS: click here to view).

Tweets by TheLantern

Police cars, fire truck and ambulance line 19th and College avenues near location where active shooter was reported pic.twitter.com/FKJXSMQnan — The Lantern (@TheLantern) November 28, 2016

Students/bystanders have been moved back from the scene toward Arps Hall pic.twitter.com/c9NnyGPLqF — The Lantern (@TheLantern) November 28, 2016

Stay with WKYC.com for additional details as they become available.