2017/2018 Brony@Home vs Team AnandTech!

Competing in the competition

To get started, just download and install the Folding@home software



Pick a username to fold under (it automatically registers it when setting up the software)



Set a quick little passkey (optional, but recommended)



Set the team to 212997 (very important, go pony power!)



In addition to installing the software, make a post in this thread saying "Hey! I love you guys (espically you tiwake!) and I want to join the competition. My folding name is SirFoldAlot even though my username on this forum is RainbowCrash41902."



About the Competition

set up the software several days before the competition starts.

List of Prizes

Competition will start at 18:00UTC December 1st 2017 and end 18:00UTC Febuary 1st 2018We are still accepting signups after the competition starts! Get your flank in here and join the troops.This is our first competition against another team ( Team AnandTech ), and we need all the help we can get.To easily keep track of how our two teams are doing, we made a graph updated every hour of the two teams. https://scootaloo.com/folding_competition The magic number to beat is 50million points in a day. This is AnandTech's peak last year about this time. Our current record for points in one day is 36,806,844: I think we can do better.It is not necessary to post in this thread if all you want to do is help the Brony@Home team beat Team AnandTech. It is necessary if you want to win a prize though.The Folding@home software is biological simulation software for research done at colleges across the world. It performs many calculations, and places a load on your system, causing hardware to heat up. While the Folding@home software is designed to go unnoticed by reducing its usage in real time to prevent disruptions to your own usage, you can also limit the maximum usage of the program to keep heat at a safe level. Monitor the first few minutes of running the software, and adjust accordingly, especially on laptops. In most cases, no adjustment is necessary though.Because Folding@home does not count bonus points unless you complete 10 work units or more, I highly suggest youWhen the competition ends you can of course stop the software, however you would be stopping your computer from doing research. The whole point of this competition is to get ponies running the software on their computers for ongoing biological research.If you want to donate something for a prize, please PM me the details with pictures/links for what it is.Prizes are distributed based on a raffle ticket system. The more you fold and get points, the more tickets you get.The first ticket drawn gets first pick and so on until there are no more prizes.Feel free to ask about anything if things are unclear.Cheers, and may the best pony win.