Hi everyone, we're canceling the funding for Failure here on Kickstarter. Check out the above final update for more details.

In the mean time, if you'd like to keep up to date about the game as we progress and want to be the first to hear about any major news then sign up to our monthly newsletter here: www.failuregame.com/signup

If you also want to follow us on twitter where we post new stuff every week check out: https://twitter.com/Dream_Harvest

We'll continue to stream the game and the development over on our twitch channel, so follow us over here too: https://www.twitch.tv/dreamharvestgames

And finaly, if you want to come and chat to us in a more close knit community then come and join our Discord server here: https://discord.gg/0qTmtROMJf3DnMCe

We hope to stay in touch with you via one or all of the above ways over the coming months and I hope you'll all continue to follow and support us moving forward.

Thank you all for your support over the last month. We wouldn't have got as far as we did without all of your generous contributions, comments and help with getting the word out about the campaign.

Failure is an RTS where you don't control your units. At it's core, the gameplay revolves around reforming the terrain by raising, lowering, removing and adding hexes in real time. But there's a lot more to the gameplay in Failure. It's fast, its tactical and its a fresh experience that feels somewhere between a god game and a tower defence game with a high level of customization.

Interview with MMOHuts.co.uk

Interview with FacelessGaming.co.uk

" I am quite enthralled with the creative direction it is headed." - Stephanie Smith Article by Cliqist

"This is certainly one we’ll be keeping an eye on." - Jamie B - Article by FacelessGaming.co.uk

Combining elements of RTS, God, CCG, and Tower Defense games, and currently in development for PC, Mac and Linux/SteamOS, Failure brings you a truly fresh experience in strategy gaming.

We took the game to Steam Greenlight at the end of October 2015 and smashed through it in just 9 days! Now we need your help!

Set in a vast cyberspace world called the MetaNet, three factions wage all out digital war for control of the network. But their rivals aren't the only enemy — the Keeper, a hyper-intelligent AI originally built to protect the MetaNet, has gone rogue...

Failure is in development by the creative team at Dream Harvest and with the narrative being penned by Antony Johnston, writer of Dead Space, Binary Domain and ZombiU as well as highly acclaimed comic series Wasteland and graphic novel, The Coldest City.

We've been developing Failure for just over a year, completely self funded whilst holding other full time jobs to do so, but we want to give it the depth and polish it truly deserves. In order for that to happen we need to make use of the talents of other professionals.

Feedback from people that have played the game has been incredibly positive and we know we're creating something special, something fresh, something that needs to be experienced by all of you.

We want to make this game with your input and this Kickstarter along with the Alpha and Beta tiers that we are offering are your chance to have an insider look into the development of our game and help shape it before others get a chance to play.

This is why we've come to Kickstarter and this is why we need your help.

While creating Failure we have drawn inspiration from a wide variety of sources include; William Gibson's Neuromancer and Neal Stephenson’s Snow Crash to films such as Tron, Lawnmower Man and The Matrix along with games such as Starcraft 2 and Hearthstone, all of which have helped bring to life our own take on virtual warfare set within a digital metaverse.

We've been working tirelessly to make sure that Failure has a careful blend of traditional strategy, tower defense and collectible card game mechanics while still feeling as technical and complex as other RTS games. The experience is unlike anything we've personally played before and, although the game is still a little way off being fully feature complete, it's already a blast to play.

Failure places you into the shoes of a hacker skilled in penetrating VR Networks. You choose a Faction, each with it’s own motivation to control the MetaNet and the data within, then begin unlocking and discovering the vast sectors of the network.

You’ll battle against Slicers, hackers from other Factions and the MetaNet's AI in a struggle for domination. To do this you'll use your customised Library of Scripts to manipulate the MetaNet and gain victory.

Summon into existence Constructs; buildings formed from the fabric of the network, upgradeable in battle and customised with a selection of different unit types.

You will also use Functions; Moddable abilities that affect the very nature of the world and manipulate behaviours of Units and Constructs, both friend and foe alike.

As you progress and become more powerful you will uncover the secrets held deep within the virtual network.

Timing and careful placement of your abilities along with quick reflexes are crucial if you are to succeed against other hackers and ultimately discover the truth held in the darkest corners of the network.

You must prepare; build, upgrade and modify your Script Library, plan your strategy and maintain control of the MetaNet's sectors. Become the ultimate Slicer.

Online Multiplayer and Single-player

A unified experience where you must explore the many sectors of the MetaNet through puzzle based single-player levels and highly competitive, fast paced multiplayer matches and scenarios.

Narrative Driven Campaign

Every match, whether played solo or against others, will drive the story forward and lead to new discoveries that enhance your abilities as a Slicer. Learn more about your Faction, and decide their fate in the war for control of the MetaNet. Uncover the truth about the Keeper to reveal its reasons for going rogue. Find your destiny within the MetaNet — and fight to fulfil it.

Wide variety of buildings to build and upgrade.

Control the battlefield with unique building types that help you to defend and attack your opponent whilst maintaining your dominance. Compile them with a unit type in order to enhance their abilities and upgrade them in game.

Unique selection of unit types, each with their own behaviours

Each unit type has their own unique AI, behaviours that determine what their objectives are and how they will react to different situations. Units can be compiled alongside a Construct script in order to bestow the construct with some of the Units' power.

Expansive upgrade system for buildings and units

Upgrade paths for both your Units and Constructs that enhance their abilities during matches. Get the upper hand against your opponents and make tough decisions on how to spend your Data resource.

Abilities that allow you to manipulate the digital world in interesting ways.

Diverse selection of abilities that allow you to control the fabric of the MetaNet. Alter the behaviours of both your own and your enemy's units and Constructs. Set traps, buff or debuff, shift the world around, plan ahead and time your placement carefully, even combine different Functions in tactical ways to help decimate your enemy.

Unique deck building system that allows you to customize and enhance your abilities.

Build your Construct and Function scripts within the compiler and enhance them with the power of mods and units. Find rare Fusion blueprints and combine scripts together to create ultimate Functions and Constructs that too can be upgraded. Your Script loadout will be truly unique to you, play how you want to play.







Global persistent battlefield where players fight for control over territory



Secure and hold the Sectors of the MetaNet for your chosen Faction and be granted special bonuses and rewards leading to an ever changing competitive landscape.

More than a century after the creation of the Internet, with society now completely reliant on its functionality, Tesseract created the MetaNet — an expansive network designed to connect, store, and catalog all known information and all digital devices. Watching over this impossibly complex data labyrinth was The Keeper, an artificial intelligence with one priority directive — protect the data at all costs.

Tesseract believed they could control the Keeper.

They will regret their failure.

The world of Failure is being penned by Antony Johnston, creator of acclaimed graphic novels like Wasteland and The Coldest City, and writer on such games as Dead Space, Binary Domain, ZombiU and LOTR: Shadows of Mordor.

As you play through Failure you will discover the stories of each Faction, and reveal the events that led to the Keeper going rogue, in both the digital universe of the MetaNet and the physical world outside.

To the world of ordinary people, the MetaNet is one vast, but single, space. There are some task-specific Subsectors, but it's all part of the same network.

Slicers are not ordinary people.

To a Slicer, the Public Sector most people see is just the beginning, little more than a playground for sleazy suits to trade cheap trinkets of data.

The real jewels are hidden behind the supposedly-impenetrable Alpha firewall. Break that, and a host of private and undocumented Sectors are exposed to the elite.

In Failure, you play as a Slicer, progressing through the world of the network to places hidden from public eyes. Using Failure's persistent narrative progression, in both singleplayer and multiplayer, your success at waging digital war will help you move up through the Sectors — each with its own unique Subsectors, challenges, and dangers to master.

Battle through the infoflow pipes of Redirect. Fight across the web of Data Filtering. Dodge the bitsinks of the Data Graveyard. Go further, and deeper, into the MetaNet than your rivals. Veteran Slicers talk of uncharted Sectors, whole archives of data waiting to be discovered by the most intrepid hackers. Some even say the Keeper is secretly creating new Sectors, unseen digital realms barely comprehensible to the human mind. Only one thing is for sure: at the heart of it all, the Keeper is watching. Welcome to the MetaNet. Scripts are the tools of the Slicer, they are used to manipulate the MetaNet during battle in ways that affect Unit behaviour and abilities. They come in two forms, Functions and Constructs. Scripts are created in the Compiler and are taken into the network by way of a Deck. As you progress through the MetaNet and become a seasoned Slicer you will be able to build complex new abilities and even build larger Decks that allow you to gain an advantage over your enemies. Basic Mockup of Scripts - Art and Stylization not final This system is a major part in playing Failure your way. It is used to unlock the tools you need to take on the challenges set before you. It allows you to create new Scripts as well as upgrade any base Scripts you already have in your Library to suit how you want to play. You'll need an HTML5 capable browser to see this content. Play Replay with sound Play with

sound 00:00 00:00