LANSING, MI -- Gov. Rick Snyder on Tuesday signed HB 4052, which prevents local governments from requiring things like a local minimum wage or paid sick days from local businesses.

The bill, sponsored by Rep. Earl Poleski, was supported by the Michigan Chamber of Commerce and other business groups who were concerned about facing a patchwork of regulations across the state.

"The bill continues ongoing work to bolster the state's job creation climate by ensuring that regulations regarding employment matters are uniform across the state. That's more effective than a patchwork of varying local ordinances employers must navigate," said Snyder spokesman Dave Murray.

The bill looks different today than it did when it was first introduced.

As it moved through the Legislature, liberal opponents labeled it the 'Death Star' bill, a reference to a space station used to destroy planets in the popular Star Wars franchise.

Part of opponents' objection to the bill was language that could have eliminated local LGBT protections.

That language was removed, but opponents were concerned about what they said was overly broad language that could have interfered with things like locals setting bar hours. That language also landed on the cutting room floor in a series of changes. In the end, the retroactive nature of the original bill was dropped as well.

That change was enough to win support from Gov. Rick Snyder. He "was supportive after changes were added to the legislation about being forward-looking only and not affecting existing ordinances that are already in place in some communities," said Murray.

Despite a few rounds of changes and multiple trips through both chambers, the legislation proved unpalatable to Democrats and liberal groups.

"Now that the language has been removed that would've opened the door for unintended consequences, the crux of this bill is abundantly clear: it's designed to attack workers and limit local democracy," said Lonnie Scott, executive director of liberal advocacy group Progress Michigan.

The governor on Tuesday also signed House Bills 4271-4274 and 4385, which eliminate regular February election dates.

See a complete list of legislation he signed on Tuesday here.

Emily Lawler is a Capitol/Business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com, subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.