Where can I send suggestions for games?

We appreciate the time and energy people put into making suggestions for our current and future games. Our company policy, however, prevents us from accepting for review any unsolicited ideas. Often in our industry, an idea being submitted will be identical or similar to one already used by other companies, or already being independently developed by or for a company. Therefore, Blizzard Entertainment® has adopted the unalterable policy of refusing to accept or look at any unsolicited submissions or ideas. You can post your suggestions under the appropriate category in the most relevant game forum: Legacy, StarCraft II, or Diablo III, Hearthstone, Heroes of the Storm, World of Warcraft.

What is Blizzard Entertainment's® copyright/trademark policy for the Internet, specifically for fansites? Can I use Blizzard Entertainment's® images, text or sound on my web page? Is it ok if I use screenshots I take in-game on my web page?

Yes, within certain limits. We asked our legal department to provide some guidelines for you, and here is what they said: Blizzard Entertainment® hereby grants you a personal, non-exclusive, non-transferable and non- assignable license to use and display, for home, noncommercial and personal use only, one copy of any material and/or software that you may download from this site, including, but not limited to, any files, codes, audio or images incorporated in or generated by the software (collectively the "Downloaded Content") provided, however, that you must include or maintain all copyright and other notices contained or associated with such Downloaded Content. You acknowledge and agree that you may not sublicense, assign or otherwise transfer this license or the Downloaded Content and that no title to the Downloaded Content has been or will be transferred to you from Blizzard Entertainment® or anyone else. You also agree that you will not alter, disassemble, decompile, reverse engineer or otherwise modify the Downloaded Content. Also, we reserve the right to revoke this limited use license at any time, for any reason, and at the sole discretion of Blizzard Entertainment®. You may not use our materials on sites that feature defamatory pornographic, or inflammatory content, including, but not limited to, hacks and cheats for any of our games or any other content that Blizzard Entertainment® find objectionable or unlawful.

Are there any legal notices and disclaimers that I need to have on my site when talking about your products?

Yes. You must include all copyright, trademark and other notices as appropriate. Appropriate notices can be acquired from here.

Can I register a domain names containing some portion of your product names such as "star-craft.com" or "war-craft.com?"

No. We are concerned that such use could cause confusion for our customers who may assume that the domain is associated with Blizzard Entertainment®.

Can I put your patches and demos on my web site for download?

Yes. We allow non-commercial mirroring of our patches and demos, so long as you do not alter the patches or demos in any way, and all files included with the original patch or demo are present and intact. Blizzard Entertainment® reserves the right to refuse permission to host or distribute our patches and demos to anyone, for any reason, at any time.

Can I put my own "home-made" maps on my web site for download?

Yes, we encourage players to create maps and trade them on the Internet so long as they are not for sale or profit, nor any other commercial purpose as defined solely by Blizzard Entertainment®.

Can I put your "Maps of the Week" on my web site for download?

No. These maps are created as a service to our customers, and are available exclusively from classic.battle.net.

Can I translate your site into another language if no such site exists?

No. Aside from the confusion it might cause our customers, we would have no control over the quality, accuracy or content of such translated sites.

Can I make add-ons or expansions for Blizzard Entertainment® games? Can I sell them?

We do not allow add-ons or expansions for Diablo®. You may make and distribute StarCraft® and Warcraft® maps and campaigns that you have created yourself, so long as it is for personal, non- commercial purposes. Any such maps or campaigns would also be subject to the other terms outlined in our End User License Agreements included with those products.

Can I sell or charge for a CD or other media containing maps, add-ons or campaigns found on the Internet?