The next commitment in Gary Andersen's first full class is a big one. D.J. Gillins, the four-star quarterback and No. 2 two dual-threat quarterback in the nation according to 247 Sports announced his commitment to Wisconsin Monday while on ESPN Radio 103.7 FM in Georgia.

Gillins missed the 2012 season after tearing his ACL and will be making a comeback for 2013. But according to Craig Powers of SB Nation Recruiting, there was a lot to like about the 6-foot-3, 185-pound quarterback pre-injury.

His tape from his sophomore season of 2011 is very impressive for a sophomore. Evaluating quarterbacks as sophomores is much like evaluating baseball pitchers as sophomores -- it's tough. You have to project how much more arm strength is yet to come with the player's assumed growth and continued physical maturity. For a sophomore, Gillins showed good arm strength. He also showed good touch, floating the ball over the first level of defenders, but in front of the second. Gillins does have some footwork and accuracy issues to clean up, but that is true for almost all high school quarterbacks. He shows impressive athleticism and appears to be a true dual-threat quarterback, though how much his ACL injury has impacted him as a runner won't be known for another year, at which point his senior highlight film will be available. If it returns, Gillins could be a dangerous piece in a spread offense. As a sophomore, he profiled as a recruit who could develop the tools to be a starter at the major college level.

The Badgers were a late entrant in the Gillins sweepstakes and beat out Boston College and Arizona for his services. He now becomes Wisconsin's third consensus four-star commit for 2014, joining offensive tackle Jaden Gault and defensive tackle Craig Evans. Guard George Panos and defensive end Billy Hirschfeld are also four-star commits according to 247.

The Badgers do also have an interest in three-star Hollywood (University School) Fla., quarterback Sean White. But between Gillins and 2015 Sandy (Jordan), Utah quarterback Austin Kafentzis' commitment? The Badgers seem pretty well set at quarterback for years to come.

QB's Gary Andersen has landed so far: Tanner McEvoy, Austin Kafentzis and D.J. Gillins. Pretty impressive list for the #Badgers. — Jon McNamara (@McNamaraRivals) July 8, 2013

With FL QB D.J. Gillins committing, Wisconsin is now the No. 24 overall class in the http://t.co/ImzKinAa81 team rankings #Badgers — Brice Marich (@BriceMarich) July 8, 2013