Strikingly, for a political newsmaker in a year plagued by grim events, most of the 278 comments about his contribution were positive, and almost all of them were about his work to legalise euthanasia. "Putting political considerations aside, this profound moral question has been discussed and guided through the legislative process in a way that has been respectful, thoughtful and fair to all," wrote one subscriber. "Andrews' gentle handling of the process has been outstanding and demonstrates a sound model on which other parliaments across the country can base their legislation." Many noted the marked difference between the stately progress of the assisted dying reforms through the Victorian Parliament and the rancour that marred the marriage equality debate at federal level. "This quite revolutionary legislation ... has placed [Andrews] in marked contrast to our federal leader who took the 'back protecting' option of a postal vote rather than face the difficulties and opposition of openly pursuing a legislative outcome through leadership," said one commentator.

"The country is watching both men. We may agree or not with either, but only one leader stood and worked through the turmoil of his party, the people and the Parliament." Some of the plaudits for euthanasia reforms came from subscribers who were not otherwise fans of the Andrews government. "The euthanasia bill is the only good thing Daniel Andrews has done and hopefully he will be on his way next election." Only one leader stood and worked through the turmoil of his party, the people and the parliament Age reader The state's big-spending, ambitious infrastructure program has its fans too. However, some noted that the Premier's agenda was regularly derailed by scandals brewing within his own party, such as the resignations of speaker Telmo Languiller and deputy speaker Don Nardella over their extravagant allowance claims.

"Despite his fractious government populated by in many cases selfish idiots, he has managed to commence an infrastructure program that will be far-ranging and futuristic," wrote one backer. "His 'Death with Dignity' legislation was also visionary and well before time. He'll be remembered as a good Premier." But will he be rewarded with a second term at the end of next year? Just as the assisted dying reforms were sent to the upper house for final debate, the Andrews government suffered a demoralising defeat in the Northcote byelection, losing a long-safe seat by a dizzying swing of 11 per cent to Greens.

After a campaign that heavily emphasised Andrews' social reforms – not just assisted dying but safe injecting rooms, rental law reforms and constant campaigning on marriage equality – one of Melbourne's most progressive enclaves rejected the party's renting, vegan female candidate Clare Burns, and instead made the Greens' Lydia Thorpe Victoria's first Aboriginal woman MP. Prenier Daniel Andrews congratulates Health Minister Jill Hennessy on the passing of the euthanasia bill in the lower house. Credit:Justin McManus Monash University politics lecturer Paul Strangio said the euthanasia laws were a significant victory for Mr Andrews and provided a marked comparison with the federal government's chaotic handling of the marriage equality debate. "I don't doubt Victorians' perception of him as someone who has done things in government," he said. "That's contrasted with the [federal] Coalition where there's a sense they're just holding the ship together."

But Mr Strangio said the Premier couldn't be confident that Victorians would remember his government's specific achievements when they cast their votes in the state election next November. 2017 AFL Grand Final Match at the MCG. Richmond Football Club won the Premiership Cup against Adelaide Football Club. 30 September 2017. The Age Sport. Photo: Eddie Jim. DUSTIN MARTIN. Credit:Eddie Jim The Newsmaker of the Year poll proved to be the only time this year when Dustin Martin, Richmond's hero who launched a thousand haircuts, came second in any contest, with 14 per cent of the nominations. Martin's stellar season and glorious Grand Final saw him sweep the board of all other medals – Gary Ayres, Norm Smith, Brownlow among them – alongside the Tigers' drought-breaking Premiership. The third newsmaker was not a person at all but a project – the Melbourne Metro attracted 7 per cent of the nominations, possibly for being the only major infrastructure plan that everyone likes. In 2018, as we go to the polls, Victorians are unlikely to see much more of the respectful, bipartisan approach to legislation that played out during the assisted dying debate.

Loading Election years are typically bare knuckle stuff, the time for gladiatorial politics and big dollar promises as parties scrap for votes in marginal seats. But as the 2017 newsmaker poll suggests, Mr Andrews' legacy may come from the one time this state did politics differently.