TORONTO, ONTARIO--(Marketwired - March 17, 2017) -

Editors Note: There are two photos associated with this press release.

Nutritional High International Inc. (the "Company" or "Nutritional High") (CSE:EAT)(CSE:EAT.CN)(OTCQB:SPLIF)(FRANKFURT:2NU) is pleased to announce several significant business milestones that Palo Verde LLC ("Palo Verde"), a company's licensed tenant in Colorado, has achieved.

FLI Product Sales Orders with LivWell

Palo Verde has shipped a large order of FLI cartridges to LivWell, one of the largest companies in the Colorado cannabis sector. LivWell employs hundreds of people in the State of Colorado and has fourteen dispensary locations.

David Johnson, Owner of Palo Verde commented - "We're pleased to be making significant progress on the sales side and have recognition of local players like LivWell. We look forward to building a long term business relationship with them as we continue to add more product lines under Nutritional High's FLI brand."

Jim Frazier, CEO of Nutritional High - "We have reached our first milestone, and now is our opportunity to penetrate the edible market with our first of kind innovative products. As we have taken methodical steps to make sure we had our new infused gourmet products formulated for taste, texture, and overall consumer experience we are pleased to announce that our new "FLI" Brand edible line will be launched in the coming weeks, in addition to the Fli branded cartridges now being shipped."

Product Roll-Out Update

At this time Palo Verde has initiated commercial sales of FLI-branded vape pen cartridges bulk oil distillate. The cartridges utilize ceramic hardware with no cotton wick, which produce no methane off gas, may be used with a wider range of batteries that are currently on the market (including high-power adjustable models) and are more aesthetically pleasing to consumers.

The subsequent MIPs products being introduced are FLI-branded disposable vape pens and gelatin capsules, which can be manufactured using the current infrastructure at the Pueblo facility. The team has also began formulating innovative edible products that will be manufactured at the Pueblo facility once the chocolate enrobing equipment has been installed and properly calibrated. Consistent with Nutritional High's vision, the team is placing emphasis on ability to manufacture the edible products on semi-automated basis in order to meet the market demand once the products are introduced for commercial sale. The edible products are expected to be introduced in the Spring of 2017.

Licensed cannabis businesses in the State of Colorado are subject to residency requirements, which precludes Nutritional High and its subsidiaries from having an interest in any proceeds as a result of production, processing or retail activities in the State of Colorado. Nutritional High is a landlord, and a lender to Palo Verde, and is in the process of entering in to agreements to provide consulting services and license its FLI brand to Palo Verde to ensure that all products produced under the FLI name and/or associated with Nutritional High brand meet or exceed the brand quality standards that Nutritional High is setting.

About Nutritional High International Inc.

Nutritional High is focused on developing, manufacturing and distributing products and nationally recognized brands in the hemp and marijuana-infused products industries, including edibles and oil extracts for nutritional, medical and adult recreational use. The Company works exclusively through licensed facilities in jurisdictions where such activity is permitted and regulated by state law.

For updates on the Company's activities and highlights of the Company's press releases and other media coverage, please follow Nutritional High on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and Google+ or visit www.nutritionalhigh.com.

NEITHER THE CANADIAN SECURITIES EXCHANGE NOR OTC MARKETS GROUP INC., NOR THEIR REGULATIONS SERVICES PROVIDERS HAVE REVIEWED OR ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ADEQUACY OR ACCURACY OF THIS RELEASE.

This news release may contain forward-looking statements and information based on current expectations. These statements should not be read as guarantees of future performance or results. Such statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from those implied by such statements. Such statements include submission of the relevant documentation within the required timeframe and to the satisfaction of the relevant regulators, completing the acquisition of the applicable real estate and raising sufficient financing to complete the Company's business strategy. There is no certainty that any of these events will occur. Although such statements are based on management's reasonable assumptions, there can be no assurance that such assumptions will prove to be correct. We assume no responsibility to update or revise them to reflect new events or circumstances.

Company's securities have not been registered under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "U.S. Securities Act"), or applicable state securities laws, and may not be offered or sold to, or for the account or benefit of, persons in the United States or "U.S. Persons", as such term is defined in Regulation S under the U.S. Securities Act, absent registration, or an applicable exemption from such registration requirements. This press release shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy nor shall there be any sale of the securities in the United States or any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful.

Additionally, there are known and unknown risk factors which could cause the Company's actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking information contained herein. All forward-looking information herein is qualified in its entirety by this cautionary statement, and the Company disclaims any obligation to revise or update any such forward-looking information or to publicly announce the result of any revisions to any of the forward-looking information contained herein to reflect future results, events or developments, except as required by law.

To view the images associated with this press release, please visit the following links:

http://www.marketwire.com/library/20170317-FLI-Cartridges.jpg

http://www.marketwire.com/library/20170317-VAPE-FLI.jpeg