Get the biggest What's On stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

It’s been a busy week for bar and restaurant launches in Manchester as operators race to open in time for Christmas.

The city has welcomed a flurry of new venues over the past few days with even more set to join them this weekend.

Thursday alone saw the launch of three new places - a cheesy Christmas pop-up bar, a European beer hall and a stylish new Spinningfields cocktail bar.

Two old favourites are also settling into new homes, while the city has also welcomed a couple of completely new names - including a Japanese joint from London and a new Northern Quarter bar and music venue launched by members of indie band One Night Only.

Here's everything you need to know about this week's new arrivals. Make sure you keep an eye on our food and drink section for all the latest restaurant and bar news and reviews.

Shoryu Ramen

(Image: Carl Sukonik)

The Japanese ramen bar has been bedding in to its new home in Piccadilly Gardens for a few weeks now but Tuesday marked its official launch - held to coincide with the full moon.

The occasion was celebrated with lashings of sake after a ceremonial breaking open of the barrel by Lord Mayor of Manchester Carl Austin-Behan.

The menu is underpinned by Tonkotsu ramen - a 12-hour pork broth brimming with char siu barbecue pork belly, kikurage mushrooms, spring onion, sesame, ginger and nori seaweed, and topped with nitamago egg - with other dishes including yakitori skewered meats, steamed buns and gyoza.

V Revolution

(Image: Dominic Salter)

After outgrowing its original home on Oldham Street, vegan diner V Rev has upped sticks to a bigger, better site on Edge Street.

Opened this week, the new restaurant serves an even wider range of animal-friendly fast food than ever before, from burgers and mac and 'cheese' to buffalo fried 'chicken'.

There's also a huge selection of dairy-free shakes and vegan cocktails, wines, spirits and craft beers, plus sweet treats from Tender Vegan Bakery.

Cooper Hall

This cavernous basement beer hall opened on Thursday on the site of the former Copacabana club in the Northern Quarter.

Owned by the team behind NoHo and Dusk til Pawn, it serves a vast array of European beers including Pilsner Urquell straight from the tank.

There's a stage for live music and DJs playing several nights a week, and plans are also in the pipeline for street food takeovers.

The Laundrette

(Image: Joel Goodman)

Making the jump up from Chorlton to the city centre, The Laundrette spins into First Street this weekend for a string of private preview dinners before opening to the public on Monday December 5.

It's bringing with it its signature whirl of 'cocktails and carbs', including mini bathtubs full of gin and pizzas fired in a clay oven.

The Refinery

(Image: Carl Sukonik | The Vain Photography)

The first of two new bars from London operators Drake and Morgan, The Refinery threw open its doors for a lavish launch party in Spinningfields on Thursday.

Based inside the newly-built XYZ building, the stylish all-day drinking and dining venue is a lively addition to the Leftbank area.

Cocktails are its forte, with a lengthy list divided between timeless classics, like the gimlet, negroni and old fashioned, to Drake and Morgan’s own concoctions.

There's also a wide range of wines and draught and bottled beers from the likes of Runaway, while the food menu offers “classic British casual dining” from breakfast through to lunch and dinner.

Jimmys NQ

(Image: Vincent Cole)

One Night Only bandmates and brothers George and Jimmy Craig are the team behind this new Northern Quarter bar and gig venue.

Promising 'good beer, good music, good times', it's got pretty much everything you could want from a night out.

Down the stairs from the main bar area is a dark and dingy den, with a stage that will host an eclectic programme of live music, comedy and spoken word.

Launching this weekend with some private preview parties, it opens to the public next week.

Miracle on Edge Street

(Image: The Vain Photography | Carl Sukonik)

Embracing all that's naff about Christmas, this gloriously gaudy festive pop-up bar from the team behind The Pen and Pencil opened on Edge Street on Thursday.

Fairylights, tinsel and foil garlands galore have transformed the ground floor of creative agency MadLab into a Santa's grotto for grown-ups, with a Christmassy cocktail menu

It will be open again tonight before reopening from December 7 to 10, 14 to 17, and 20 to 23. Opening hours are from 4pm until late each day, and there’ll be DJs spinning disco tunes on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays.