South Carolina Governer Nikki Haley announced Friday that, "This is not a good day for South Carolina." The bad news was having to admit a massive security breach in the State's Department of Revenue that resulted in the theft of 3.6 million social security numbers and 387,000 credit/debit card numbers (only 16,000 of which, it is believed, were unencrypted,) This incident affects more than three-quarters of South Carolina's 4.6 million population.

Haley characterized this as an "attack by an international hacker," but no details have been released about the identity of the perpetrator while their investigation is under way. The State became aware of the breach on October 10 but could not close it until ten days later. Haley said she wants the hacker, "slammed to the wall," and certainly she must feel slammed as well. Was it just the luck of the draw, or are South Carolina's cyber defenses particularly weak? This will be a question that the other 49 states will have to answer.

This incident will also place cyber security on the table for the presidential candidates as well. Even more than climate change, cyber security is a big complex issue that does not translate well into soundbites, 30-second spots or talking points. It is scandalous, but unsurprising, that this issue came up only fleetingly in the last presidential debate. Cyber security will someday be seen as right up there with Social Security, health insurance and national defense as key measures of our well-being. This attack makes it clear that not only are individuals incapable of adequately protecting themselves through consumer grade solutions, and not only do the vulnerabilities of business place consumers at risk, but government itself is not up to the task of vouchsafing its citizen's identity.

"We want to make sure everybody understands that our State will respond with a big, large-scale plan that is somewhat unprecedented to take care of this problem," Haley said, in an attempt to make it clear that she understands the magnitude of the issue. But her garbled prose raises concern that the states are out of their depth when it comes to global issues like this. What is needed is a national standard for cyber security that the government and business will adhere to in order to provide protection for our citizens. And like any tech standard, this will be an evolving entity. It must be built in a way that is responsive to the growth of the threat.

South Carolina has said it will provide affected taxpayers with a year of Experian credit monitoring and identity theft protection service. "Anyone who has filed a South Carolina tax return since 1998 is urged to visit protectmyid.com/scdor or call 1- 866-578-5422 to determine if their information is affected," the Department of Revenue advises.

"The cost is also going to be enormous, given that South Carolina may be required to pay for identity theft protection services for anyone who has paid taxes in South Carolina since 1998," Stephen Cobb, from security firm ESET told Computerworld yesterday. "Encryption of the data may slow down the process by which the stolen records are converted into cash through identity theft and fraudulent accounts, although that will also depend on the strength of the encryption."

How strong is the South Carolina's encryption? How vulnerable to attack are the agencies of other states? What share of the nation's Social Security numbers would have to get hacked to compromise the whole system? The costs of failure are great, and state governments, stressed by years of budget cuts, may be our weak point. This breach should put cyber security on the national agenda.

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – -

To keep up with Quantum of Content, please subscribe to my updates on Facebook or follow me on Twitter.