Cover for SPACE CASE #1

Hi, we're Drew and Hazen. We just finished creating an original comic book, SPACE CASE!

It's a 36-page journey that's action-packed, heartwarming, and full of laughs. The first issue sets in motion an ongoing, all-ages adventure that will take you to the farthest ends of the universe! We're creating the comic book of our dreams and we want to get it into your hands... so YOU can be a part of our story!

The hero of our series is a young boy named Ronnie, a kid who grew up on Mars! He's the son of a butt-kicking, intergalactic space hero; a crusader for peace and justice in a treacherous universe. In our first issue, when Ronnie's mom is kidnapped by his father's greatest foe, an evil alien mastermind, it falls to Ronnie to become the hero and save the day!

Over the course of our series, we will go to many new worlds, meet many different types of creatures (some friendly, some not), and ultimately see if Ronnie can live up to his father's storied legacy. With guidance from unlikely allies, like a strange robot named NAN0 (who you see on our cover), Ronnie must learn to adjust to his new, dangerous reality.

Our goal with this Kickstarter is to raise the necessary funds to print several hundred copies of issue #1. With the cost of printing so high, it is challenging to self-fund both the production and distribution of the book. With your help, we can handle the cost of printing and make our comic available at an affordable price in our online store, at conventions, and at select retailers.

Ronnie hopes to LAUNCH a successful kickstarter!

While the bulk of our projected goal will go toward the printing cost, a small portion will also fund shipping costs, the Kickstarter fee, and our fantastic rewards. Any excess funds will go towards the making of issue #2, which we are illustrating at this very moment!

Drew Dorenfest (Writer/Creator) + Hazen Becker (Illustrator/Colorist) at Comic Con 2016!

Drew Dorenfest (Writer/Creator) is a film editor in Los Angeles, CA. He edits movie trailers and commercials, which is fun and challenging! He's been a lifelong fan of comics and graphic novels, so creating Space Case from start to finish was truly a dream come true. This project marks the beginning of what he hopes to be a long-running series that continues to expand and develop into a vivid, imaginative universe.

Hazen Becker (Illustrator/Colorist) is multi-talented artist in San Diego, CA who designs for J!NX apparel. He’s been into comic books for most of his existence, so he couldn’t pass up the awesome opportunity to help bring one to life. Together with Drew, he’s helping to create something special, which he hopes will inspire a new generation of artists and creatives alike.

Oh boy, we have some super cool rewards for our Kickstarter backers!

We truly appreciate any amount you can pledge. These rewards were designed with the goal of building a fanbase and getting our colorful comic brand out there. We hope you love what we have to offer!

Sneak Peek: Page 1

Sneak Peek: Page 2

Sneak Peek: Page 3