There it is. Any rational person looking at the future would have thought the backward, savage Middle East, would, in time, look more modern — more like Western countries. Who would have imagined that Europe would morph into the Middle East. Ghastly.

The president of Kühne Logistics University calls the mandatory Arabic proposal “keeping up with reality.” Actually, it’s hurling backwards to the seventh century. That’s the reality.

“Arabic is a world language,” he said. “We have to stay on pace.” Has the Arab world stayed on pace with the modern world? Ask the women in their cloth coffins (burkas).

Learn Arabic in order “to coexist”: in other words, submit.

German University President Floats Idea Of Mandatory Arabic In Primary Schools, By Daily Caller, February 3, 2016: A German “education expert” proposed Wednesday that Arabic becomes a mandatory subject in German schools to enable refugees and Germans to coexist. Thomas Strothotte, president of Kühne Logistics University and a renowned voice in education issues, told Die Zeit that society as a whole would benefit and “keep up” with a new reality from becoming increasingly multicultural. Strothotte has served as president at several German universities and founded two private schools in the city of Magdeburg. “We would appreciate being a country of immigration and multiple languages,” Strothotte said. “Refugee children need to learn German and German children Arabic.” Strothotte believes increased understanding of Arabic will have positive effects on Germany culturally, economically and politically. Strothotte is not the first to call for Arabic classes in the German curriculum. Christian Wiesenhütter, deputy chief executive for the Berlin Camber of Commerce, called Arabic a new “world language” back in 2013, long before the Syrian refugee crisis was on the horizon. Strothotte primarily wanted to boost German business with the idea. “We must finally acknowledge that Arabic is a world language,” he said. “We have to stay on pace.” State-run broadcaster Deutsche Welle started an Arabic speaking radio channel in December. DW Chairwoman Karola Wille said it was “an important signal” during a “difficult phase” when the broadcaster announced the launch two months ago.

The Truth Must be Told Your contribution supports independent journalism Please take a moment to consider this. Now, more than ever, people are reading Geller Report for news they won't get anywhere else. But advertising revenues have all but disappeared. Google Adsense is the online advertising monopoly and they have banned us. Social media giants like Facebook and Twitter have blocked and shadow-banned our accounts. But we won't put up a paywall. Because never has the free world needed independent journalism more. Everyone who reads our reporting knows the Geller Report covers the news the media won't. We cannot do our ground-breaking report without your support. We must continue to report on the global jihad and the left's war on freedom. Our readers’ contributions make that possible. Geller Report's independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our work is critical in the fight for freedom and because it is your fight, too. Please contribute to our ground-breaking work here.

Make a monthly commitment to support The Geller Report – choose the option that suits you best. Contribute Monthly - Choose One Subscriber : $18.00 USD - monthly Contributor : $36.00 USD - monthly Patron : $50.00 USD - monthly Silver member : $100.00 USD - monthly Gold member : $250.00 USD - monthly Platinum member : $500.00 USD - monthly