TOKYO – President Rodrigo Duterte should consider talking to North Korean leader Kim Jong-un to help ease the tensions in the Korean Peninsula, his incoming spokesman said.

Rep. Harry Roque (Kabayan party-list) thinks Duterte can “make a difference” on the issue as a “respected” leader in the region.

“I will strongly advise him because I think he has the stature in the region. I think leaders respect him as a strong and able leader. And he could be the person to make a difference,” Roque told reporters last Tuesday here.

Roque, a former professor of international law, believes Duterte will welcome an opportunity to engage with Kim.

“I have not had the occasion to confer with him but now that you mentioned it, I will confer with him. And I would say that if there is an opportunity the President would welcome that opportunity,” he said.

“Although I do not know how much influence we could exert over the North Korea, quite frankly. The perception is that bulk of their economic and military ties is with China. China is still the most influential country as far as North Korea is concerned.”

Asked how the Philippines could help address the threats posed by North Korea, Roque replied: “The President, in his departure speech, said countries should still try to engage and talk to North Korea. So I do not know if the President would be instrumental in this kind of communication. But that is one way.”

North Korea missile tests

North Korea has been conducting ballistic missile tests, worrying its neighbors who are concerned about their impact on peace and stability in the region.

The totalitarian state stepped up its nuclear program under Kim’s leadership despite the economic sanctions slapped by the United Nations.

Member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations have expressed concerns over the missile tests and have urged North Korea to comply with its obligations under all relevant UN Security Council resolutions.

Last August, Duterte described Kim as a “crazy man” and a “maniac” who is playing with “dangerous toys.” He warned that the Far East would end up becoming an arid land if the North Korean dictator commits a mistake.

Earlier this week, the Philippine leader said a nuclear war was “unacceptable” and called on stakeholders to negotiate with Kim to diffuse the tensions in the Korean Peninsula.

Duterte and Japan Prime Minister Shinzo Abe condemned the North Korea missile tests after holding a bilateral meeting last Monday here.

“We need to address many issues confronting the region and threats to the stability and security (in the) Asia-Pacific. Foremost among our shared concern are developments in the Korean peninsula and the continuing missile launch tests of North Korea,” Duterte said.

“We condemn these tests and call on all concerned stakeholders to return to the negotiating table to peacefully resolve the situation,” he added.

Duterte and United States President Donald Trump are expected to discuss the North Korean threat when the American leader visits the Philippines this month.