Get the biggest football stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Over the course of a season, there are many, many goals that find their way past a goalkeeper and into the back of the net.

And while you may think that you've seen the vast majority, such is the amount of goals that are notched across the globe in any particular week, that quite simply, you haven't.

So, with that in mind, we've liked to put together a list of 12 of the best goals that have been scored this season that you may have missed.

Head down our list and vote in our Mirror Football poll, to let us know which you think is No.1.

Sepp Brulmans (Racing Mechelen)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

At the start of March, Belgian Third Division outfit Racing Mechelen were looking to extend their lead at the top of the table in a match against VW Hamme.

And obviously full of confidence, 19-year-old midfielder found himself 20 yards out, back to goal and with the ball falling from the sky.

What happened next saw the youngster earn his place on our list; jumping and twisting, he fired a tremendous overhead kick into the far corner, beating a stunned goalkeeper who didn't move an inch.Tekkers.

Dean Cox (Leyton Orient)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

The O's have enjoyed an excellent season in League One, and are guaranteed a play-off spot at the end of the campaign.

And in their recent clash with Gillingham, Russell Slade's side produced a moment of real class, with a wonderful team goal that supporters of Barcelona would have been proud of.

Featuring NINE of their 10 outfield players, Slade's side patiently kept possession, working the ball across the pitch and carving playing their way through the Gills, before Dean Cox fired home from 22 yards. Teamwork.

Elliott Durrell (Hednesford Town)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Bradford Park Avenue thought that they had secured a point against Hednesford with a 93rd minute equaliser during their Skrill North fixture back in January. Eliott Durrell had other ideas.

The diminutive forward decided to summon the individual powers of Diego Maradona, Lionel Messi and Georgi Kinkladze as he raced past a number of challenges straight from kickoff.

And then, when he reached the opposing penalty area, he clinically drilled a low left foot shot into the bottom corner, for his (then) 23rd goal of the season. Individualism.

Munir El Haddadi (Barcelona Under-19)

Barcelona youngster Munir El Haddadi had the time of his life in UEFA's inaugural Youth League.

The 18-year-old forward led Barcelona to glory, netting 11 times during the tournament including a brace in the final. And it was the second of those, in the 3-0 win over Benfica, which earned him his place on our list.

Turning inside his own half and spotting the opposing goalkeeper off his line, El Haddadi pinged an audacious effort over the stranded stopper and into the net. Ping.

Glen Little (Wealdstone FC)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

The former Burnley and Reading mavn spent a career bamboozling defences in the Football League and sauntering up and down flanks, most notably for Steve Coppell's Royals in their 106-point Championship campaign of 2005-06.

And now he does similar deed in the Ryman Premier League for Wealdstone FC, at the age of 38. And though he may not be as quick as he once was, he's still bamboozling defenders.

Here, he picks up the ball in his own half, drives at the heart of the Dulwich Hamlet defence, before delicately chipping the goalkeeper from just inside the penalty box. Sumptuous.

Andreas Pereira (Manchester United Under-18)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

The Belgian youngster helped United on their way to an FA Youth Cup win in December, thanks to a corking effort against Burnley at Turf Moor.

With wonderful poise and little back-lift, Pereira eases away from two defenders before firing a cracking long-range effort into the top corner.

All in, it was rather similar to something some bloke named Ronaldo used to do for the senior side. Thronker

Andrea Petagna (AC Milan Primavera)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

A wonderful moment of inspiration from Italy under-19 striker Andrea Petagna back in February helped Milan to a youth team title at the expense of Belgian club Anderlecht.

It's little wonder that 18-year-old Petagna has already made his senior bow for the Rossoneri with a goal like this, a wonderful moment of individualism that certainly left his manager - ex-Milan hero Pippo Inzaghi - pleased.

Petagna held off a defender, before flicking the ball up, spinning and firing into the far corner. Glorious.

Juan Roman Riquelme (Boca Juniors)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Juan Roman Riquelme has enjoyed a stellar career, the Argentine arguably the last of the genuine No.10s around whom their side's are built.

Now 35, the moody playmaker's powers may gradually be slowing down, but in the recent Superclasico with bitter rivals River Plate, Riquelme rolled back the years.

With his side 1-0 down in the second-half, the ex-Villarreal star produced an outstanding curling effort, which left Marcelo Barovero simply motionless - and sent the commentator into delirium. Artistic.

Tim Roberts (Folkestone Invicta)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

The non-league keeper Tim Roberts summoned the force of Stoke's Asmir Begovic with this long-range effort.

The Folkestone Invicta keeper added gloss to a 4-0 win over Horsham in the Isthmian League with his long hoof glorious long-range lob.

“I caught it flush, the wind helped a bit I think and it went in. I just started laughing," said Roberts, speaking to the Folkestone Herald. Funny.

David Rocha (Gimnastic)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Sitting in the third tier of Spanish football, Gimnastic have endured seven years of steady decline since spending a year in La Liga in 2006-07.

But with more long-range efforts from David Rocha, perhaps they could see a brighter future.

The 29-year-old former Albacete midfielder caught this 30-yarder in glorious fashion back in February and there's no doubt he'll be dining out on it in years to come. Dipper

Motasz Salhani (Al-Wehdat)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

On the same weekend as Fabian Delph's flick beat Chelsea, Jordanian Premier League player Motasz Salhani did something similar - only from 35 yards!

The Syrian striker, 28, meet a waist high pass - heading behind him - by arching his right leg back and meeting the ball with his heel.

What happened next was nothing short of spectacular, as the ball ballooned into the air, looping over the opposing keeper and dropping perfectly in the opposition net. Scenes.

Marcelo Vidal (Independiente)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Independiente midfielder Marcelo Vidal notched this 87th minute winner back in December - firing a free-kick from in his OWN HALF past the hapless Patronato goalkeeper Sebastian Bertoli.

With a deceptive nonchalance, Vidal fired an arrow from halfway, leaving Bertoli grasping at nothing but thin air.

Cue the wild celebrations, and obligatory over-the-top South American commentary - although in this case it might well have been entirely justified. Technical.