T-Mobile Amps the Holidays, Starts with Gift of Unlimited LTE for Existing Customers

Un-carrier announces Black Friday offers and kicks off 'Un-carrier Unwrapped' − four weeks in a row of surprise holiday gifts − starting with three full months of unlimited LTE data for T-Mobile customers – at no extra charge!

Bellevue, Washington — November 23, 2015 — T-Mobile (NASDAQ: TMUS) is kicking off the holidays in style with Un-carrier Unwrapped, a full month of holiday gift-giving, with one special gift coming each week. First up, the Un-carrier is giving the gift of unlimited high-speed data for your smartphone – for the next three months – to every single one of its postpaid Simple Choice customers. But in true T-Mobile fashion, we won't stop there. T-Mobile is also delivering special holiday gifts to Sprint, AT&T and Verizon customers starting next week – one carrier per week. Plus, T-Mobile is serving up a banquet of holiday offers, including a free tablet, $0 down $0 per month on the Samsung Galaxy S6 32GB with JUMP! On Demand, and more.

"We've had a fantastic year, and we're going to spread that T-Mobile cheer by starting with the most important people first… our existing customers! Now you get Unlimited LTE data on our blazing fast network for three full months as a gift from the Un-carrier to you," said John Legere, president and CEO of T-Mobile. "But that's not all….we know that Verizon, AT&T and Sprint customers need some holiday cheer, too - so we've got presents coming for them. Just wait!"

The holidays are for connecting with family and friends. In fact, data usage on T-Mobile's network jumps more than 10% in December. The last thing customers want to worry about is their data, so T-Mobile is taking that worry away. For the next three months, everybody – all active Simple Choice postpaid customers as of end of day November 23, including business customers – has Unlimited 4G LTE smartphone data once you use up all your data and your Data Stash.

And, as the Un-carrier so often does, they've done the hard work to keep things simple for customers. Simple Choice postpaid customers don't have to do a thing to get their Unlimited LTE gift. On December 1, 2015, the special holiday gift will simply appear under the tree—that is, in their existing T-Mobile plan. Which is how gifts ought to be given, right? No stress. No hassles. And, they'll keep that free Unlimited LTE smartphone data as long as they're on the same T-Mobile plan with Binge On active until March 1, 2016.

More gifts – for the carriers' mistreated customers – will start arriving next Monday, one carrier per week. Stay tuned.

Black Friday: Get a Tablet on Us – and a Whole Lot More On top of this unprecedented customer gift, Black Friday is starting early at T-Mobile. Beginning this Wednesday, November 25, you can get the popular Alcatel Onetouch Pixi™ 7" Android-powered™ 4G LTE tablet for $0 with any qualifying data plan at participating T-Mobile stores across the country and online. That's right: $0 down, $0 payments; you pay only the sales tax. With Binge On and a new tablet this holiday season, the entire family can watch all the holiday movies they want from top video services like Netflix, HBO, Hulu, and SlingTV and never worry about the Grinch gobbling up your high-speed data.

More Black Friday Deals: T-Mobile customers can get the popular Samsung Galaxy S6 32GB for just $0 upfront and $0 per month with JUMP! On Demand with an eligible trade-in. $0 + $0 = $0. You pay only the sales tax! When you buy ANY Samsung smartphone, you get $100 off a Samsung tablet! Combined with the Black Friday Weekend offer on the Samsung Galaxy S6, it's a helluva deal! Get the popular UE Boom Bluetooth speaker for $100 off (retail price $199) and enjoy all the holiday tunes you can handle – without ever using your high-speed data bucket thanks to T-Mobile's Music Freedom. For more about this and other special T-Mobile holiday offers, please visit: www.t-mobile.com/holiday.