The New Epic Dhol Ensemble is the most comprehensive and deep-sampled collection of large-scale Epic Dhol Ensembles on the market. The library is a completely remastered, redesigned and reprogrammed edition of our original Epic Dhol Ensemble. The New Epic Dhol Ensemble contains over 2.000 samples, built-in articulation browser, internal step-sequencer, front-face FX, textural convolutions and our newest 3.3 Chaos Engine.

The New Epic Dhol Ensemble VST consists of a large ensemble of Punjab Dhol drums and recorded them in the same orchestral hall as our New Epic Toms Ensemble.

The Punjab Dhol is a double-sided barrel drum large and bulky to produce the preferred loud bass. The drum consists of a wooden barrel with animal hide or synthetic skin stretched over its open ends, covering them completely. These skins can be stretched or loosened with a tightening mechanism made up of either interwoven ropes, or nuts and bolts. Tightening or loosening the skins subtly alters the pitch of the drum sound. The stretched skin on one of the ends is thicker and produces a deep, low frequency (higher bass) sound and the other thinner one produces a higher frequency sound. In contemporary Punjabi music, dhols with synthetic, or plastic, treble skins are very common.

The Epic Dhol Ensemble VST drums follows our over general direction in terms of recording all articulations at 10 velocity layers and 10 round robin pr. velocity layers. It contains a great variety of articulations, since each side of drum produces very different sounds. Essentially its divided into a bass section and a snare section. We played the bass section with the traditional big wooden Dhol stick, mallet, hands and fingers to ensure we covered the entire range. The sound is similar to that of Taiko drums, but with a little more tonality to it. The snare side was recorded with the traditional thin bamboo Dhol stick, however we also recorded this side with mallets, brushes and fingers. In addition we recorded different rimshot positions on the drum, so the users can create a variety of different soundings rhythmic textures on the drum. Th library also contains a substantial amount (+800) of BPM based loop banks for instant user gratification. We recorded the dhols and other smaller complimentary percussion instruments together. The loops work perfect with the multisampled sets, but also work perfectly as stand-alone instant-gratification type of music loops.