TEST SERVER / Patch / Version 1.0.269 - REV 42?? / 02.02.2016

Balance Changes



Fixes

Changed Destiny Board requirements such that all combat unlocks require a minimum mob tier of no more than 4 - you can now level any item on T4 or higher mobs .



. You will now move extremely slowly while between 200% and 800% load (800% being roughly equal to Elder's Ox maxload bonus). You will not be able to move above 800% load.



(800% being roughly equal to Elder's Ox maxload bonus). You will not be able to move above 800% load. Fixed the issue where you cannot craft if more than 200% loaded; you can now always craft regardless of weight , but will be warned if it will leave you unable to move.



, but will be warned if it will leave you unable to move. City Guards will continue to attack until you lose aggro in any of the normal ways, rather than resetting as soon as illegal activity stops (eg your target dies).



in any of the normal ways, rather than resetting as soon as illegal activity stops (eg your target dies). Removed self-cast on double-pressing cast hotkeys.



cast hotkeys. Fixed an issue where using a short-cooldown skill on a moving target would make that spell unusable.



would make that spell unusable. Buffs and debuffs applied during casting will now correctly affect cast results.



will now correctly affect cast results. Fixed an issue with spells with target limits could fail if too many targets were hit.



Fixed Legendary Explorer's Palace so it now accepts Elder's furniture.



so it now accepts Elder's furniture. Fixed minimap icons in Ironhold and Ironfast.



Allowed mobs to correctly fade out with invisibility spells.



Fixed cases where pinch-to-zoom-out didn't work on Android .



. An error message is now correctly shown when trying to attack city buildings.



Fixed an issue where /played was dealing with weeks badly.



was dealing with weeks badly. Fixed an error when trying to move items to a full bank with shift-click.



with shift-click. Fixed issues with journals having invalid Fame values.



Fixed PvP setup on dungeon in Shaw Sodden .



. Stability improvements!



Axes are a little bit too energy-hungry right now. They are designed to be energy hungry damage beasts, but they run out of energy a little too fast, so we decreased the energy costs a little.Rending Strike:Base Energy: 6 -> 5Axe Smash:Base Energy: 13 -> 10The Bows have a lot of utility and sustain damage. The lack of burst damage made them a bit too slow in PvE, though, so we buffed Deadly Shot to give a strong Q-Spell choice for PvE.Deadly Shot:Damage increased by 20%Base Energy: 3 -> 6As much as we want Healers to be able to also do solo PvE, we went a bit too far with the last buff for Smite, so we are rolling back the damage changes. It will still be better than before Brutus, but it should not steal the show of the main damage dealers.Smite:Damage reduced by 15%Base Energy: 6 -> 5In the last content update the Spear got reworked. The item stats did not emphasize their new role enough. With this change the weapons will have more ability power and deal more damage, but as a trade off they will be less tanky.The new Spirit Spear wasn't always a fit for everyone's playstyle. Especially the Halberd, that needs to stick on the target to hit its E-spell, wasn't really gaining much from the Spirit Spear. That is why we re-enable the Low Stab from before. You can now choose to play with either Low Stab or Spirit Spear. The slot 3 abilities on E can be charged up with both spells. The Spirit Spear's damage and buff duration got buffed. As a tradeoff the range was reduced. Also the damage buff stacking up was fixed.All Spear Line Items: Additional Damage Factor: 0.1 -> 0.15Health Factor: 0.1 -> 0.05Low Stab:Re-added the Low Stab as a spell choice on slot 1.Spirit Spear:Buff Duration: 6s -> 8sAttack Range Buff decreased by 20%Reworked the Damage Buff: it now stacks up correctly and is based on Auto Attack interval.:In the last content update the Sword got reworked. The item stats did not emphasize their new role enough. With this change the weapons will have more ability power and deal more damage, but as a trade off they will be less tanky.The Mighty Swing got an increased AoE radius, as it was a tad too hard to hit disengaging enemies with its short delay.All Sword Line Items:AdditionalDamage Factor: 0.1 -> 0.15Health Factor: 0.1 -> 0.05Mighty Swing:AoE Radius: 5 -> 6