This video is no longer available

This video was hosted on Vidme, which is no longer in operation. However, you might find this video at one of these links:

Video title:

This Dog was involved in a terrible car accident

Upload date:

October 10 2017

Uploaded by:

pawsoncuracao

Video description:

Please consider a donation to "Rescue Paws Curacao": https://www.paypal.me/rescuepawscuracao Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/RescuePawsCuracaoFoundation/ Website: http://rescuepawscuracao.com/ This is Robbie’s story… Robbie was still a young pup when he was living on the streets with his mom and brother. They had always managed to survive on their own and had never been in contact with human beings. People were therefore scary creatures to them! That became apparent during the rescue of Robbie and also throughout the days he had spent at his foster home…something that was just heartbreaking to witness, since one could clearly see the fear in his eyes. Nevertheless, Robbie had to be rescued from the streets after he had been involved in a terrible car accident that had left him with a broken paw and many wounds. Nursing on the street was definitely not an option. This was obviously a dog that needed a whole lot of TLC (Tender Loving Care) after getting him the urgently needed medical attention. Little by little Robbie started to trust those surrounding him at Casa Bak (Shelter). Then came the day of the surgery, which was very exciting as we all wanted to see this little fellow back on his paws! The confinement period with restricted activity after the surgery was a bit difficult, especially for such a young pup. However, Robbie did extremely well! The fear to trust continued to fade away even more during this period, thanks to the care and attention given to him by his loving fosters at Casa Bak. Unfortunately, just when things started to look up for Robbie, his paw took a turn for the worse…and the only option left was amputation. It was a tough decision to take, but in the end it saved Robbie’s life. Not only that…Robbie was visibly happy after that awfully painful paw had been removed. He got used to life on 3 paws pretty quickly and is just as fast as any other dog with 4 paws! Shortly afterwards, someone had heard about Robbie’s story and decided to adopt the little fellow. It was once again very scary for Robbie during the first couple of days. Yet his fear made way for excitement since he got a super mommie, who is willing to give him all the time and attention he needs. We’re happy to see that Robbie has gotten a loving home after all that he’s been through in his short life. However, he is not the only dog that is in dire need of intensive care and attention. Rescue Paws can certainly use your help to make this possible for other dogs as well. Will you help us to help them? Your donation can make a difference. Music Credits: Artist: Whitesand Track: Beyond https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f2bXIBxWOMI #vidmeexclusive #Vidmecommunity #dogs #animals #rescue #pets

Total views:

434