ANTIOCH, Calif. (KTVU) -- An East Bay man who was left a quadriplegic by gun violence is proving no obstacle can stand in the way of his dreams after his latest remarkable accomplishment, achieved with a little help from his friends.

Paul Murillo has been paralyzed from the neck down since he was 19 years old.

"I was shot four times, once in the head, once in the neck. Left shoulder and jaw," Murillo said from a wheelchair in his Antioch home.

He doesn't know who shot him that night eight years ago in Ventura County, or why. No one was ever arrested.

But what happened hasn't stopped Murillo from living a full life, as demonstrated by a recent adventure with his friends.

Together they hiked more than 2,000 feet up to the top of Mission Peak near Fremont, wheelchair and all.

"I wanted to accomplish it. I wanted to do it. I had great friends who were able to help me," said Murillo.

The idea was hatched by Murillo's close friend.

"How cool would it be for us to get him up on the hill," said friend Reggie Olivar. "Let us be his legs to let him see what we get to see."

A group of eight friends pushed Murillo from the back and pulled him with straps from the front through the steep parts.

"Not even 10 feet and my legs were burning. Calling someone else over to take shifts with me," said Olivar.

But they made it all the way to the top.

"Think about it, wow. It's kind of unimaginable. Am I really going on top of this mountain? Is it really possible," said Murillo.

Murillo says he has forgiven the person who put him in this wheelchair. Murillo is also studying psychology at a community college.

Paul also shares his experiences by speaking to youth groups, hoping it will help keep them on the right path and maybe even inspire them to succeed.

"There is hope. You just keep going. Keep fighting. Keep striving. Never give up. Regardless," said Murillo.

Murillo says he is ready to climb any mountain put in his way. And he says he can't wait to see what adventure his friends are cooking up next.