Elon Musk Lays Out His Reasons Against Voting For Trump

As the U.S. presidential election nears its merciful conclusion on Tuesday, Elon Musk came out against Republican candidate Donald Trump last Friday during an interview with CNBC.

“I feel a bit stronger that [Trump] is not the right guy,” said Musk in an interview with CNBC on Friday. ” He doesn’t seem to have the sort of character that reflects well on the United States.” (Source: “Donald Trump’s character reflects poorly on United States, Elon Musk says,” CNBC, November 4, 2016.)

Musk does not feel that the election, however, will have a strong impact on Tesla Motors Inc (NASDAQ:TSLA) stock either way, although Musk did support Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton’s economic and environmental policies, calling them “the right ones.”

Tesla just had its second-most-profitable quarter ever this past Q3, and Tesla stock has been shooting up as a result, supporting what has already been a solid year for TSLA stock.

Advertisement



While not a passionate endorsement by any means, Musk still appears to favor Clinton in the upcoming election.

Musk is one among many tech luminaries who have come out in support of their favored candidate in this election cycle. Peter Thiel, Musk’s co-founder of PayPal Holdings Inc (NASDAQ:PYPL) and an early investor in Facebook Inc (NASDAQ:FB), is one of the more prominent tech figures to come out in support of Trump.

This particular election campaign has drawn a lot of notable figures into the political sphere, some simply endorsing candidates while others making public shows of backing their candidates.

Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz, for instance, promised $20.00 million in donations back in September in order to stop a Trump presidency. (Source: “Facebook co-founder promises $20 million to stop Trump,” L.A. Times, September 9, 2016.)

There has been speculation regarding just how much the results of the election will affect the stock market and a number of holdings. With the election fast approaching, Tuesday will lend credence as to whether there will, in fact, be any sizable shifts in shares following the American presidential nominee.

I’m just glad that this election cycle is finally coming to an end. The nagging question remains, however: what will television news cover once the polls are in?