An Amtrak train derailed during the Friday morning rush hour at Penn Station and then sideswiped an incoming New Jersey Transit train, crippling service, witnesses and sources said.

Several people suffered minor injuries on the 1,000-passenger NJ Transit train as it scraped past the derailed Amtrak Acela Express train while pulling in around 9 a.m., sources said.

The Amtrak Acela Express 2151 train bound for Washington, DC, “had a minor derailment while moving at a slow speed while departing New York Penn Station” around 9 a.m., Amtrak said in a statement.

“The rear of the train was still on the platform, and all 248 passengers have exited the train onto the platform and into the station safely.”

Amtrak rider Tom Steindler, 62, said, “We were leaving the station … Literally 15 or 20 seconds later, we were off the tracks.”

“It sounded like we were running over something … You could hear the noise. You could feel it,” said Steindler. “We were very blessed we weren’t going fast.”

Steindler said the café car behind the car he was in “went sideways” and passengers evacuated through the back of the train.

It’s unclear how the Amtrak train, which originated in Boston, derailed.

NJ Transit rider Jordan Geary, 34, director of creative development for “Sesame Street,” said that as the train pulled into the station, “there was a loud explosion next to my head. Everyone in my car screamed out.”

“My wife woke up … and then there was the sound and reverberations of metal scraping,” the Montclair resident said.

He added, “A lot of the windows got knocked off their hinges and pushed in from the impact … a few were broken.”

Passengers took to social media to detail the incident.

“So my train was just clipped by another train as we pulled into Penn Station…,” Jason Lynch, a TV writer for AdWeek, posted on Twitter at 9:09 a.m. along with a photo of the side of a damaged train.

In a follow-up tweet, Lynch said, “thankfully, everyone seems to be okay. Can’t figure out how it happened, or how the damage wasn’t much worse.”

Geary, riding on the Montclair-Boonton Line, said the train window “blew out” onto him after the collision.

“My @NJTRANSIT train just collided with another oncoming train. Blew my window out and into me. Thankfully everyone is okay,” Geary tweeted.

He said “what happened today was scary as hell.”

Twitter user @SareveChante tweeted, “Train I was supposed to be on just derailed in penn station. Praying everyone aboard is okay.”

Passengers headed for Penn Station reported on the social media site that their trains were “backing up” as a result of the incident.

Mayor Bill de Blasio tweeted after the incident, “Thankfully we’re hearing there were no serious injuries at Penn Station after derailment of an Amtrak train. We are monitoring.”

NJ Transit said all of its trains were suspended going in and out of Penn Station and Midtown Direct trains were being rerouted to Hoboken, but fares were being cross-honored system-wide.

Amtrak said service into and out of Penn Station will be delayed while the incident is investigated.

MTA officials said there was no impact on Long Island Rail Road trains.