The Man Up programme, which helps rehabilitate inmates, was shut out of prison earlier this year.

﻿

Serco has banned Brian Tamaki's son-in-law from offering a Destiny Church outreach programme at its South Auckland prison.

The surprise move has upset former inmates who benefited from the programme, and prompted a case manager at Kohuora Auckland South Corrections Facility to resign in protest.

LAWRENCE SMITH/FAIRFAX NZ Destiny Church's outreach programme has been banned by Serco.

Destiny elder Caine Warren said there was no apparent justification for the ban against him.

"I think the cause of us being told to leave is Destiny Church, no two ways about it," he said.

READ MORE:

* Corrections backs down on Quaker Christmas flower ban

* Destiny Church leader Brian Tamaki backs President Trump

* Destiny Church's Hannah Tamaki meets with Rainbow Youth

* Serco-run Wiri prison towards bottom of Corrections prison rankings

* Serco staff forced to apologise for privacy breach at south Auckland prison

CHRIS SKELTON/STUFF Caine Warren is the national director of Man Up, a programme that supports men in turning their lives around.

Warren is the national director of Man Up, a Destiny programme which is focused on empowering men to be better fathers and partners.

He is married to Jamie Warren, daughter of Destiny leaders Brian and Hannah Tamaki.

LAWRENCE SMITH/FAIRFAX NZ Kohuora Auckland South Corrections Facility opened in 2015, and is managed by private operator Serco.

Former inmate Billy Baggs was released from prison in November and said working with Man Up while behind bars helped him break the cycle of drugs, violence and gangs he had been stuck in for most of his life.

"It's had a good effect on me and my whole family," he said.

"Even my siblings and old associates are looking at Man Up now, because of the changes that I've made."

CHRIS SKELTON/FAIRFAX NZ Former inmate Billy Baggs says joining the Man Up programme helped him turn his life around while in prison.

Warren was told he was no longer welcome at the prison when he arrived for a routine visit on Wednesday.

Prison director Mike Inglis said he recognised the importance of spiritual guidance for prisoners, however Man Up was not approved to deliver services at the prison.

"Prisoners can speak to either of Kohuora's chaplains, or be referred by the chaplaincy team to people from other faiths as appropriate," he said.

LAWRENCE SMITH/FAIRFAX NZ A Serco staff member resigned amid concerns the decision to ban Man Up unfairly targeted Destiny Church.

An internal email from case management manager Amy Culley made clear to staff that Man Up would not be facilitated at the prison.

She wrote: "If you have any men who are being or who have been solicited for this programme can you please let me know?"

The email was leaked by a Serco employee who was angry about the decision to ban Man Up, and felt it unfairly targeted Destiny Church.

DAVID WHITE/FAIRFAX NZ Labour corrections spokesman Kelvin Davis said external providers deserved feedback if their services were axed.

"We're supposed to reduce reoffending for Maori, and Man Up plays a part in that," the employee said.

"I'm not saying it works for everyone, but it certainly helps some men."

The employee spoke on the condition of anonymity as they were not permitted to speak to media.

It's understood a case manager has resigned in protest over the decision; they are reportedly the fifth case manager to quit Serco in recent months amid concerns over the private prison operator's management.

Warren said he wanted an explanation about why Man Up had been banned.

Labour's corrections spokesman Kelvin Davis said external providers deserved feedback.

"I don't have a lot of time for Destiny Church, but if there's a programme that's helping prisoners address their issues and become better people then I'm all for it," he said.

Davis said he was aware of several contractors that had been axed recently, also without being given any reason.

"Everyone is entitled to feedback about their performance so they have an opportunity to improve what they're doing, whether it's Destiny or Joe Bloggs," he said.

Baggs said it was disappointing other prisoners wouldn't have the same chance to access Man Up.

"Honestly, I think it's quite pathetic," he said.

The Department of Corrections said while it was unlawful to discriminate on the grounds of religious belief, decisions about which visitors were approved were ultimately at the discretion of prison management.

In December, the Department of Corrections backed down on its controversial decision to ban Christmas flowers from Mt Eden Prison.

There had been widespread indignation after it was revealed the Quakers would not be allowed to take bouquets to prisoners - a tradition they've kept up every year since the First World War.