The Mason County Republican Executive Committee hosted Mason County Sheriff Kim Cole on Tuesday night and with opioid abuse an epidemic across the nation, Cole shared his office’s numbers on the amount of drugged drivers, which has increased from past years. In 2016, the sheriff’s office made 41 arrests for marijuana possession and four arrests for heroin possession.

“We are now up to 20 drugged drivers in Mason County (in 2017),” he said. “We’ve had 51 drug arrests — 27 possession of marijuana and 10 heroin amongst the drug arrests.

“Look at the flip-flop. The marijuana arrests were high last year and the heroin arrests were low. That’s starting to take a reverse order,” he said.

Cole said the community has to recognize that there is a drug problem, but understand there is no way to completely stop it.

“There’s nothing we’re going to do to stop it,” he said. “There’s no magic wand. We’ve had a pill problem for 15 years in Mason County. Now we have a heroin problem.”

Cole said the best way to combat the drug issues is through education, treatment and analyzing the facts and data. Cole specifically mentioned his concern with the potential legalization of recreational marijuana throughout the state.

“You hear people talk, ‘Well, alcohol is legal, so why not legalize marijuana?’” he said. “Well last year was the first time in nine years Michigan had over a thousand residents killed (from drunk drivers.) What do you think legalizing another controlled substance will do when you put those people behind the wheel of a car?”

Cole said that drugs and alcohol have different “social circles,” and statistics have shown that drunken driving arrests occur at a different time of the day then drugged driving arrests.

“When do most of your drunk drivers kill themselves or somebody else? Weekend nights, right?” he said. “Marijuana fatalities, these crashes are occurring between three and six in the afternoon … the drugged drivers are killing family members when they’re coming home from school or coming home from work.”

Trying to keep up with treatment

Cole said that people suffering from addiction have treatment options once incarcerated.

“We have Dr. Kuster who comes in and she also runs the Suboxone program and a substance abuse program out of her office, so she’s doing that there and she is doing a program at our office too,” he said.

Suboxone is a prescription medicine that’s used to treat adults who are addicted to opioids.

Cole said incorporating faith into the treatment process has helped break the cycle of inmates choosing friendships that are not supportive for recovery. There’s now a livestream of a church service available for inmates at the jail.

“I do believe there needs to be a faith-based component to that to a certain degree,” he said. “Radiant Church came to me and said, ‘We would really like to live stream our church services if we could.’”

There’s also been a “sharp” increase in the number of calls to Community Mental Health to help with treatment, Cole said.

Although there are resources available, Cole said they’re not enough for those in the county that require help with addiction.

“I would certainly be interested in hearing any other services that may be out there that can help people struggling with addiction,” he said. “Because really the only time they have to get clean is while they’re in jail.”

Cole said more resources are needed, but the issue of some addicts not giving a full effort to participate in treatment has also proven to be a problem.

“Before they can get their body clean, they need to get their mind clean,” he said. “That’s through some really in-depth counseling that needs to be done.”

Clearing complaints

Cole discussed what his office is doing to serve the area, his concerns within the county and what needs to be done in the future to further carry out the mission of the sheriff’s office.

After giving a brief history of the Mason County Sheriff’s Office, Cole discussed the performance of his staff. Cole said the number of criminal complaints cleared, solved or having warrants requested for increased from 24 percent in 2012 to 65 percent in 2017.

“We’ve really made clearing criminal complaints a priority,” Cole said. “If it’s important enough for a citizen to call 911, (deputies) need to take that call and need to take it seriously.”