Researchers believe that humans have evolved to prioritise quick thinking over fast movement, which helped our ancestors to survive.

Metabolically speaking, human brains are expensive, requiring a lot of energy to run. The new study suggests that when forced to choose between fuelling the brain or the muscles, the body picks the brain, sending more glucose to neurons at the expense of other areas , a trait dubbed the ‘selfish brain hypothesis.’

The ‘selfish’ nature of the brain is most evident in people who have faced long-term starvation or malnutrition, where their bodies have wasted away yet their brain matter is still intact.

For the new study, Cambridge's PAVE (Phenotypic Adaptability, Variation and Evolution) research group tested 62 male students with an average age of 21.

The rowers performed two separate tasks: one memory, a three minute word recall test, and one physical, a three minute power test on a rowing machine.

They then performed both tasks at once, with individual scores compared to those from previous tests.

During the simultaneous challenge, recall fell by an average of 9.7 per cent, while power fell by an average of 12.6 per cent. Across all participants the drop in physical power was on average 29.8 per cent greater than drop in cognitive function.

Dr Longman, said a well-fuelled brain offered early humans better survival odds than well-fuelled muscles when facing the challenges that come from living in complex societies.

“In our evolutionary past, humans are believed to have transitioned from a ‘soldier’ to a ‘diplomat’ lifestyle,” he said.

“We began to invest fewer resources in developing and maintaining high levels of muscularity, and instead began to achieve status through the development of enhanced social manipulation skills.

“Today's society is highly integrated, and during a typical day we are required to process quantities of information that are unparalleled throughout history. Prioritising cognitive function is most definitely helpful in the world we have created.”

The research was published in the journal Scientific Reports.