Someone had broken into the old milk house. The thief had hacked away at the vines growing over the whitewashed brick walls, then cut through the lock and removed the entire metal device — lock, latch and all.

Even in the middle of a bright February day in 2012, it was pitch-black inside the small building. But Tim Kearns saw immediately that 75 handmade crates had been removed, crates stacked vertically to protect their fragile cargo: 64 stained-glass windows that, he learned much later, are worth an estimated $3.5 million.

He knew he'd have to call his brother Dennis, who handled their father's estate. For the second time, their dad had been robbed of of an integral part of who he was.

"Oh, gee," Tim Kearns thought, and mentally began berating himself. He'd let his father down — Bob Kearns, the modern-day folk hero who'd invented the intermittent windshield wiper.

His dad had gone to immense trouble to buy those 90-year-old pieces of colored glass from the Catholic church outside Detroit where he'd worshiped as a boy. The windows were to illuminate the chapel Bob Kearns had planned to build in the meadow of Cheston-on-Wye, his 1654 estate on the Eastern Shore.

Rachel Woolf, Baltimore Sun The shed on Robert Kearns' property in Queenstown, where more than 20 antique stained glass windows were stolen. The shed on Robert Kearns' property in Queenstown, where more than 20 antique stained glass windows were stolen. (Rachel Woolf, Baltimore Sun)

The discovery of the break-in was the first step in what has become an almost three-year odyssey, during which the six Kearns children located the stained glass and are now seeking to have it returned.

By that February, Bob Kearns had been dead for seven years. But Tim could still hear the familiar voice in his head.

"My father found solace in those windows," he said. "They were part of his life. This would have become another quest."

Now 58 and living in Talbot County, Tim Kearns might not be an exact copy of his father, but he's cast in the same mold. He easily channels his father, pitching his voice to Bob's characteristic inflections:

Rachel Woolf, Baltimore Sun Dennis Kearns, of Michigan, sits on the steps of his father's property in Queenstown on July 21, 2014, close to where more than 20 antique stained glass windows were stolen. Dennis Kearns, of Michigan, sits on the steps of his father's property in Queenstown on July 21, 2014, close to where more than 20 antique stained glass windows were stolen. (Rachel Woolf, Baltimore Sun)

"We have to get this glass back," Tim said, landing hard on the final word.

"We gave those parishioners our word" — he draws out the final syllable — "that we were going to take care of this glass. Whatever it takes — we have to get those windows back."

A case pending in federal court in Minnesota pits the Kearns estate against an antiques salvager who says he bought the windows fair and square. Hearings on motions could begin as early as December before U.S. District Judge Donovan W. Frank.

Bob — often acting as his own attorney — strove for 31 years to be compensated for inventing the intermittent wiper, a device installed on virtually every car built since 1969. His assistants were his children, who began fighting their father's battles in elementary school.

The inventor argued that Ford and Chrysler had infringed on his patents from 1964. For Bob, the battle was never about the money. It was about protecting the rights of small inventors to their intellectual property.

"My dad believed people shouldn't get away with doing bad things," Dennis Kearns said. "They shouldn't steal, and if they do, they should get caught."

Bob fought all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court and eventually was awarded about $30 million. His Don Quixote-like crusade was portrayed in the 2008 movie "Flash of Genius" starring Greg Kinnear.

Now the salvager, Don Riggott, is seeking a court ruling that he's the rightful owner of the stained-glass windows installed in Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Church around 1924.

His company, D.C. Riggott Inc., is based in Minnesota and sells liturgical antiques. Riggott paid $11,000 for the windows on Aug. 21, 2012. A receipt is included in the court documents.

The seller, Matthew Lastner, says he bought the windows from an acquaintance of Bob Kearns'. The acquaintance isn't named in the court record, so there the trail ends — at least for now.

Riggott sees himself as an underdog fighting a powerful and wealthy family. From his perspective, he's the guy at risk of losing everything. If the windows really were stolen, he wants to know, why did the Kearns family wait until the late summer of 2013 to file a theft report?

As he put it: "They pressured me, using money and influence to get these windows that belong to me."

According to court documents and to Maryland State Police Sgt. Michael Smith, a worker on the estate was the first to discover that the milk house had been burglarized.

But that discovery apparently occurred months after the crates vanished, when clues such as footprints had long since been erased. And the Kearns brothers say that when they discovered the break-in, they had no idea then that the windows were so valuable.

John Lingenfelter, an executive with Mayer of Munich, the windows' German manufacturer, is preparing an appraisal for the court case. His off-the-cuff estimate is that the collection is worth $3.5 million.

"These windows are stunning," Lingenfelter said. "Though they were designed to hang 20 feet in the air, the figures all have eyelashes."

The 15-foot round "rose window" once installed above the church entrance is sublime, with a central medallion showing a pensive Madonna. When the afternoon sun struck the window, it dropped petals of carmine, amethyst and emerald light onto the heads of the worshipers below.

***

All his life, Bob believed he was guided by a divine presence. But there's no denying he also was buffeted by more capricious forces. As one of Bob's daughters, Maureen Kearns, put it:

"We used to say that my dad carried around an umbrella under which it always rained."

On Bob's wedding night in 1952, the nervous groom aimed a champagne bottle in the wrong direction. The cork flew into his face, leaving him legally blind in one eye.

Traumatic as the accident was, it inspired Bob's breakthrough design. He wondered why windshield wipers didn't work like eyelids, which pause between blinks.

Chance was at work again in August 2013, when Bob's eldest son, Dennis, sat beside his dying mother in a Rockville hospice.

During some down time, Dennis Kearns pulled out his iPhone.

"I wanted to send a picture of my dad's windows to a friend who's interested in stained glass," he said. "I Googled them, and bam! There they were on Ebay."

Now 60 and living in Keego Harbor, Mich., Dennis has the rumpled demeanor of a private investigator — which he is — and his father's take-no-prisoners jaw. Within seconds, he found a publicity release headlined, "Architectural Antique Salvage Company DC Riggott Inc. Selling Rare Cathedral Artifacts With Dramatic Past."