This morning, Martin Shkreli, elfin plague of the pharmaceutical world, was arrested by federal agents on securities fraud, and the world collectively high-fived. According to Bloomberg Business, Shkreli illegally used stock from a biotechnology firm he started, Retrophin, to pay off unrelated debts. In a press conference Thursday, the U.S. attorney said Shkreli ran a "Ponzi-like scheme" over a five-year period, and he was charged in a seven-count indictment for orchestrating three sham investment schemes, one with Retrophin and two with hedge funds. After pleading not guilty Thursday afternoon, he was released on a $5 million bond, and his travel was restricted.

Shkreli's downfall has been in the making for some time. Here, we track his rise to the top of everyone's most hated list.

Act I: The Rise

Shkreli is a largely unfamiliar name until September, when his company, Turing Pharmaceuticals, takes the price of a life-saving medication and jacks it up from $13.50 to $750 per pill. When Donald Trump calls you "a spoiled brat," you know you've gone too far.

Act II: Political Intrigue

In October, Bernie Sanders rejects a campaign donation from Shkreli and gives the money to an HIV clinic. Shkreli remains bitter.



Hillary Clinton takes notice too, calling out Shkreli's business practices in early November, to which Shkreli oh-so-eloquently replies, "lol."



Act III: The Buying of Friends

Shkreli begins to build a posse. Or something. His new "friends" include Bobby Shmurda, Fetty Wap, Lil Shaun, and girls willing to send him photos. Despite his supposed intentions, this does absolutely nothing to make him more likable or cool.

Martin Shkreli, who paid $2 million for the secret Wu-Tang album, says he'll bail Bobby Shmurda out of jail: https://t.co/Eu8F2AaGcv — XXL Magazine (@XXL) December 16, 2015

With my guy @MartinShkreli real cool dude pic.twitter.com/nzy2LRw143 — LIL SHAUN (@lilshaun45) December 6, 2015

Days before his arrest, Shkreli also befriends a 17-year-old high school girl, offering to write her recommendation letters to Columbia and beat up her classmate, Gawker reports. "BRUH SHE'S IN HIGH SCHOOL HANG UP," one livestream commenter advises. He does not.

Act IV: The Twist

On December 9, it is revealed that Shkreli has become the sole owner of Wu-Tang Clan's newest album, Once Upon a Time in Shaolin, and he isn't going to share.





Just FOIA'd the FBI to try to get the Wu-Tang Clan album from Martin #Shkreli - Let's party! pic.twitter.com/Dd0nxU1DwH — Andrew Wiseman (@wisemana) December 17, 2015

Act V: The Foreshadowing

Apparently, keeping one prized album from the hands of hungry fans isn't enough. Shkreli starts soliciting suggestions for his next musical purchase on a livestream, all while giving the world a lesson on music appreciation.





Act VI: The Reckoning

Then he is arrested in his Murray Hill apartment—Manhattan's bro'est neighborhood—while wearing a hoodie Thursday morning. And no, the FBI did not recover the Wu-Tang Clan album.



#Breaking no seizure warrant at the arrest of Martin Shkreli today, which means we didn't seize the Wu-Tang Clan album. — FBI New York (@NewYorkFBI) December 17, 2015

Act VII: The Downfall

The day after his arrest and release on bail, Turing Pharmaceuticals, the company that catapulted Shkreli into the spotlight just months prior, announces his resignation as CEO. Karma is a real bitch.

Act VIII: The Hacking of the Personal Brand, Maybe

In the week following his arrest, Shkreli claims his Twitter is hacked. But honestly, with such relatable tweets as "I am now God," how could you even tell? Further defending his honor, Shkreli claims the feds only targeted him as retribution for his drug price-hiking ways.



Shkreli also delves into the theatrically exhaustive world of performance art, saying that his public persona is "a bit of an act." But only a bit.