Thank you to Little Sunshine Boutique for providing me with product, free of charge, in exchange for this honest blog review. All opinions are 100% my own.

As a mother to five kiddos, I’ve really come to appreciate some of the awesome products I’ve discovered over the years. One of those such things is kid-friendly mama jewelry! It never fails that as soon as I pick a baby up, they immediately clamp their little hands onto my necklace. So I’ve found it’s just easier to wear things that I won’t be upset about if they break, or even better, items that are kid-safe! So when I came across Little Sunshine Boutique’s awesome selection of products, I was excited to try them out.

The first thing I want to note is how beautiful Little Sunshine Boutique packages their products. After opening the shipping box, I felt like it was Christmas! Check out the care and love put into this. They were so pretty that I almost didn’t want to even open them!

The first item I want to mention is their Elegant Silicone Teething Nursing Necklace. Right away, my first impression was the fact that this necklace did not scream “made for kids”. While it does offer the break-away clasp feature, it’s really pretty and offers a simple and sleek style so it looks great any time, any where. It’s fairly lightweight and I even forgot I had it on when we went out! I also really like how it comes in handy when I’m nursing. Instead of doing acrobatics or pulling on my shirt, our little girl will play with the beads and sit nicely. Since she’s just over 18 months, we’re pretty much past the teething stage but she sure enjoys playing with the beads.

The next item I want to mention is their Child Rainbow Silicone Sensory Necklace. I love rainbow colored anything so I was immediately drawn to this necklace. Made from 100% silicone beads, this necklace measure in at about 20″. The mint colored teething ring on our necklace is removable and just slips off when the necklace is open. Overall, it’s super cute and the chunky beads offer a fun and unique style. Plus, it’s dishwasher safe for easy cleaning.

The final product I received for review from Little Sunshine Boutique is their Pink Rainbow Elephant Silicone Baby Carrier Accessory. While I seem to be wearing our little girl less because it’s Winter here in Minnesota, I still strap her on when we’re out shopping and sporadically around the house when she wants. But, we are heading to Disney World for vacation and I know I’ll be wearing her all day long so this cute little Elephant will come in handy for sure! It’s a great sensory tool that simply attaches to the carrier by way of the breakaway clasp. Plus, more rainbows and the little heart shaped beads right next to the elephant are simply darling!

Final Thoughts: I am really impressed with the great quality as well as uniqueness of the products at Little Sunshine Boutique. Our little girl is drawn to the bright fun colors while I’m happy with the style, ease of use, and practicality. Definitely two enthusiastic thumbs up.

Buy It: Head over to Little Sunshine Boutique to see for yourself the great selection of products they offer.

Connect: Don’t forget to like Little Sunshine Boutique on Facebook and follow them on Twitter, Pinterest, and Instagram for all the latest news and promotions.

Win It: Little Sunshine Boutique is generously offering one of our lucky readers their choice of any ONE product from their website. The winner may choose from any in-stock product that is available at the time of prize fulfillment. This giveaway is open WorldWide and will end April 18th, 2016. For your chance to win, enter the Giveaway Tools below. Good luck!

Entry Form





I’m a city girl turned country by my awesome husband and we have three busy boys and two darling daughters. I love spending time with my family, reading Karen Kingsbury novels, and catching up with friends while our kiddos have play dates. I’m blessed beyond measure and can’t wait to see what God has in store.

Follow Miranda on Pinterest | Twitter| Blog | Instagram http://www.emilyreviews.com/category/miranda

Related posts we've written: