The video will start in 8 Cancel

Get the biggest politics stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

As with every budget, the devil in Philip Hammond's financial statement is in the detail.

Once you've got past all the big headline announcements like new schools and more money for social care, all that's left is the small print.

And surprise surprise - some of it will leave you worse off.

This year's slimmed-down budget is only 64 pages long.

But between the main 'Red Book' and the impact assessment prepared by the Office of Budget Responsibility (OBR), there's been plenty for us trawl through.

Here's a few things you might not have spotted.

(Image: REUTERS)

1. The National Insurance hike will cost workers £2BILLION

A backlash is mounting over Philip Hammond's decision to hike Class 4 National Insurance for the self-employed from 9% to 11%.

He justified the move - which breaks a Tory manifesto pledge - by saying it'll treat couriers and taxi drivers the same as those employed by someone else.

He said the "combination" of that and another measure "raises a net £145m a year for our public services by 2021-22."

What he didn't say was that taken alone, the Class 4 hit is much, much bigger.

The hike will cost self-employed taxpayers an extra £325m in 2018-19, £645m in 2019-20, £595m in 2020-21 and £495m in 2021-22.

That totals more than £2billion over four years - the same as extra funds for social care.

2. If you're poor, you lose

The Prime Minister's made a big deal of building a "country that works for everyone".

But the small print of the Budget's "distributional analysis" shows it's mainly a country that works for middle-to-high earners.

Once you count all tax, welfare and public service changes, the 30% poorest households will be worse off by 2019-20.

Among the richer earners, only the top 10% will be worse-off.

3. The Tory 'National Living Wage' won't hit its target of £9 an hour by 2020

When George Osborne introduced his so-called 'National Living Wage' - in reality, an increase in the Minimum Wage for the over 25s - just two years ago, he said it "will rise to £9 an hour by 2020."

Buried in a footnote on page 58 of the OBR report on today's budget is an admission that it will probably be significantly less than that.

It reads: "The level of the National Living Wage consistent with our forecast has been revised down slightly since November – from £8.80 to £8.75 an hour in 2020, reflecting revisions to our earnings growth forecast."

The OBR doesn't set the level of the National Living Wage, but that's their prediction based on labour market forecasts.

4. George Osborne gave 100 tycoons £1million each

(Image: pixel)

An astonishing ‘balls-up’ by George Osborne helped 100 rich shareholders dodge £1million EACH in tax.

The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) gave a scathing verdict of a key change by the Tory ex-Chancellor in analysis of the Budget.

In his 2015 Budget, Mr Osborne announced he’d hike the tax rate on dividend income by 7.5%.

Yet his change only took effect in April 2016 - meaning people could bring their dividends forward by a year to avoid it.

The government predicted this would happen, and estimated £7.6billion of dividend income would be brought forward from 2016/17 into 2015/16.

But the OBR now says this was “underestimated by a significant amount” - and in fact, it was £10.7billion.

HMRC later estimated £114million of tax was legally avoided by just 100 people.

Barrister Jo Maugham QC tweeted: “Government ballses up change to dividend tax.

“Costs public purse £800m. And hands average bonus of £1.14m to each of 100 wealthy tax dodgers.”

5. The astonishing true cost of May's grammar schools

Theresa May’s free schools “vanity project” will cost nearly £1billion over five years, it’s been revealed.

The eye-watering figure - triple the £320million announced by the Treasury this week - was sneaked out in the Budget small print.

Earlier this week, the Treasury announced what it claimed was £320m to “help fund” 140 free schools, some of which can be selective as part of the PM's grammar schools revolution.

It has now emerged that sum only covers the period to April 2021 - by which time most of the schools won't be built.

Spending on the free schools programme then ramps up, and in 2021/22 alone will be £655million.

6. Wage growth has been revised down

This graph was from the independent OBR forecast.

The OBR said: "PAYE income tax is the Government’s single most important source of revenue. But, as Chart A illustrates, our forecasts since 2010 have tended to be over-optimistic and we have revised them down over time.

"The shortfalls have reflected weakness in average growth in wages and salaries and in the amount of tax raised per pound of wages and salaries – the effective tax rate.

"Weakness in total wages has reflected weak earnings growth, itself reflecting weak productivity growth."

7. No more tax-free Airbnb?

The Budget’s small print reveals the government wants to rewrite rules in “rent-a-room relief”.

This lets people who rent out a room in their home earn £7,500 before they start paying tax on it.

But it was designed to encourage lodgers - not help people cream off more money when they let a room through Airbnb.

“The government will consult on proposals to redesign rent-a-room relief, to ensure it is better targeted to support longer-term lettings,” the Budget says.

“This will align the relief more closely with its intended purpose, to increase supply of affordable long-term lodgings.”

8. Brexit is making you poorer

(Image: PA)

The OBR estimate household incomes will fall by 0.7% in 2017, due to the fall in the value of the pound.

Labour say that'll leave the average family £475 worse off in 2021, and will cost them £1,822 over the course of five years.

And guess what kicked that off?

9. Here's why those borrowing figures are so great

The level of public borrowing this year has been revised down from a whopping £68.2 billion to a comparatively wee £51.7billion.

Which is good news, right?

Well, kind of.

The documents point out that a good chunk of that is because of a change in the date we pay some fees to the EU changing from this year to next year.

So it's not nearly as impressive as it seems.

10. Wasn't the deficit supposed to be gone by now?

The OBR assessment predicts the deficit will finally be wiped out in 2025-26 if it continues falling at the current rate.

But there’s a little problem with that.

Remember what George Osborne promised in his 2010 Budget?

“The structural current deficit will be eliminated by 2014-15”.

Bless.

11. And finally... So much for that 100,000-a-year migration target

So this is awkward.

Theresa May has refused to abandon her pledge to get net migration below 100,000 a year.

She’s been nowhere near it. And the independent Office for Budget Responsibility seems to agree.

In its economic model, it assumes she won’t hit the target over the next five years.

“We assume the UK adopts a tighter migration regime than that currently in place, but not sufficiently tight to reduce net inward migration to the desired ‘tens of thousands’,” the analysis says.

Plus some good news in the small print...

A crackdown on tax-avoiding footballers?

There's a line in the document about HMRC issuing guidance on 'image rights'.

More than 50 wealthy Premier League footballers and agents are being investigated over possible tax avoidance, HMRC officials revealed in December.

Earnings from image rights are treated separately from footballers’ standard salaries, following a court ruling in 2000 which stated they should be treated as two separate income streams.

That means that while footballers pay domestic tax as normal on their salaries, they can in some cases can incorporate their image rights in foreign countries and so pay a different tax rate on those earnings.

The document says: "The government is aware that some employers pay image rights in respect of employees under separate contractual arrangements to employment income.

"HMRC will publish guidelines for employers who make payments of image rights to their employees to improve the clarity of the existing rules."

Budget surpluses / deficits every year