SF police officer kills himself after being pulled over in Richmond

Now Playing:

UPDATE: SF cop who killed self in Richmond was investigated for child sex abuse

Original story: A nine-year veteran of the San Francisco Police Department — who was being pursued by the Richmond police — shot and killed himself in a parking lot moments after being pulled over Monday, police from both cities confirmed.

The suspect was Antonio Cacatian of Richmond, sources said.

Around 1:30 p.m. Monday, Cacatian pulled into the Hilltop Mall parking lot in Richmond followed by a Richmond police officer with lights flashing.

As the Richmond officer approached the suspect’s driver’s side door, “he hears the gunshot,” said Lt. Felix Tan of the Richmond Police.

A San Francisco police officer shot & killed himself when a Richmond police officer made a traffic stop on Monday, December 18, 2017. A San Francisco police officer shot & killed himself when a Richmond police officer made a traffic stop on Monday, December 18, 2017. Photo: Richmond Police Dept. Photo: Richmond Police Dept. Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close SF police officer kills himself after being pulled over in Richmond 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

The Richmond officer “retreats back to his patrol car, but he can’t see what’s in the vehicle because the windows are heavily tinted,” Tan said.

The officer used a shotgun-propelled beanbag to break the suspect’s windshield and saw that the suspect “was alone and deceased,” Tan said.

San Francisco police confirmed that the dead man had been an officer with the department who was under an investigation “that involved multiple jurisdictions,” but would not give specifics.

A statement from the San Francisco Police Department expressed “condolences to the officer’s family.”

The Contra Costa County coroner is expected to release the officer’s identity Tuesday, according to San Francisco police.

Chronicle reporter Phil Matier contributed to this report.

Nanette Asimov is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: nasimov@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @NanetteAsimov