We’re very happy to announce that a beta version of Hydra support with the Sixense Core API and SixenseVR SDK is now ready for download.

If you’ve already been provided a link for the software, just head back there and grab the latest build.

If you’d like access to the download site, please ping me at steve.h@sixense.com and I’ll send you the link.

Enjoy!! And please feel free to give us feedback.

Hydra Support

The Razer Hydra can be used in SixenseVR, but seated play is recommended. Position the Hydra Base directly in front of you, just out of arm's reach.

Calibration

During play, when you put on the HMD and pick up the controllers you will see the calibration environment. Your avatar will be positioned in front of you, displaying the correct pose you should mirror while calibrating. Sit up straight and look forward with your body facing the Hydra Base Extend your arms to your sides in a T-pose Click both thumbsticks at the same time (press your thumbs into the center of the joysticks until you feel a click) You may repeat calibration at any time by performing the same steps during play.

Oculus DK2 Demos

Setup

Be sure that you have the latest Oculus Runtime for Windows (V0.8.0.0-beta) installed: https://developer.oculus.com/downloads/

Minimum system specs:

Video Card: NVIDIA GTX 970 / AMD 290 equivalent or greater

CPU Intel: i5-4590 equivalent or greater

Memory: 8GB+ RAM

Video Output: Compatible HDMI 1.3 video output

USB Ports: 2x USB 3.0 ports

OS: Windows 7 SP1 or newer

Razer Hydra Mode

You can use your Razer Hydra to play the demos included with the SDK.

To enable the Razer Hydra in a demo you need to be sitting forward with your arms stretched out in a T-pose then click both joystick buttons at the same time.

***Disclaimer: All of the below demos are designed to be played with a STEM System. We did our best to adapt the experience to the Hydra. When you run these games with the Hydra you won’t have wireless HMD positional tracking; so it will help if you ensure that your DK2 is equipped with the head tracking camera.***

SixenseVR Archery

There is a bow floating to your left and you can grab it by reaching to it with either hand and pulling the trigger. After you have the bow, you can grab an arrow by reaching your free hand over your shoulder, and then squeeze and hold the trigger. With the arrow in your hand, bring it to your bow, pull your arrow hand back, then release the trigger to shoot.

SixenseVR Home Run Derby

In Home Run Derby the player is allowed 10 practice hits before the derby begins. Once the derby begins, the player tries to hit as many home runs as possible. Each hit that is not a home run counts as an out. The game is over when the player has 10 outs. Tap home plate with the bat to start the game again. Difficulty levels include Arcade, Normal and Simulation. When the difficulty is set in Simulation mode keys 0-9 adjust pitching speed from 70 to 90 mph.

SixenseVR Shooting Range

The user has a holstered gun on their hip and magazines on the opposite hip. To grab the gun, place the hand near it and pull the trigger. The gun can be fired by pulling the trigger again. Eject the magazine by pressing any face button on the controller holding the gun, then grab and place a new magazine near the bottom of the gun to load the new magazine into the gun. Magazines are reloaded with bullets when they are placed on the hip or dropped to the floor.

SixenseVR Slash

There are several swords floating in front of the user. The user can reach out with each hand and grab a sword by pulling the trigger. The sword can then be activated by pressing any face button on the controller. Use the swords to deflect the laser blasts and strike the drone when it gets too close.

SixenseVR Golf - Putting Green

To change the height of the club, press any face button to extend the putter head to the ground, or you can use the joystick up and down for fine adjustments. Pull the trigger to drop a ball. The user has 10 balls to get the highest score possible. Each hole is worth a unique amount of points; the farther the hole, the higher the points.