It looks like our bet to the 2016 Miss Earth pageant has a very…unique…sense of humor.

Perhaps, in an attempt to deflect the controversy surrounding her, reigning Miss Philippines-Earth Imelda Schweighart jokingly likened herself to Albert Einstein.

In case you didn’t know, Einstein regarded as the most influential physicists of the 20th century.

LOOK: 7 winning photos of Miss Earth PH 2016 winner Imelda Schweighart

READ: Miss Earth contestant Imelda Schweighart: ‘Our President is doing Hitler stuff in PH’

This after a listener of the dzMM radio show Sakto — which is hosted by Ahwel Paz and Jobert Sucaldito — described her as “crazy.”

It so happens that the hosts of the show read aloud the text messages that they get from their listeners.

One message, which was read by Sucaldito, went like this: “Parang baliw yata. Loka loka yata itong babaeng ito, mukha [lang] siyang matalino.”

(“This woman seems crazy. She must be crazy, she [just]looks smart.”)

In response, the 21-year-old beauty queen, who was featured on the show via a phone patch, quipped: “Dun sa nagsabi na parang baliw, pwede ba akong may sabihin? Si Einstein po kasi, si Einstein, napagkakamalang baliw.”

(“To the person who said I look like I’m crazy, can I say something something? Because Einstein, Einstein was thought of as crazy.”)

“And karamihan ng mga intelligent people ay pinagkakamalang baliw, at may pagkabaliw,” Imelda added.

(“And a lot of intelligent people are mistakenly called crazy and are a bit crazy.”)

Okay, should we just take her word for it?

Schweighart’s latest comment, though, may not top the notoriety of what she said to Miss Earth Austria Kimberly Budinsky. Recall the now-infamous words: “Oh my God! Our President is doing Hitler stuff here in the Philippines!”

Schweighart is competing in the Miss Earth 2016 pageant, along with 83 other women. The coronation night is set on Oct 29.

Schweighart, a former TV host, has the tough task of trying to win for the Philippines its third consecutive Miss Earth crown. Angelia Ong from Ilo Ilo won the title in 2015, while Jamie Herrell from Cebu won in 2014.

READ: Miss PH-Earth Imelda Schweighart explains ‘Hitler comment’…and we’re confused

READ: Stolen shoes and ‘poison oil’: Ms. Philippines-Earth 2016 Imelda Schweighart claims bullying

“I try to keep my peace of mind, but then people always pressure me,” she said. “I’m really excited for the show. I don’t know what will happen. I have no idea. But I will really do my best for a show for us all.”

Well, good luck to you.