Posted on Jul 25, 2014 in Attractions, Magic Kingdom, Ride Videos, Rides, Videos, WDW 3 |

Buzz Lightyear Space Ranger Spin High Score Secrets

Buzz Lightyear Space Ranger Spin High Score Secrets

If you have ever been on Buzz Lightyear’s Space Ranger Spin at Magic Kingdom in Walt Disney World you are probably wondering how you can get a high score.

The score keeper will max out at 999999. You may think that it is impossible to max out and get that high score. The truth is it is not that difficult to get the max high score on Buzz Lightyear’s Space Ranger Spin.

It is all about knowing which targets to hit. There are two targets that will give you 100,000 points per hit. If you go for these targets you can go the whole ride and only shoot ten times and get the max high score.

So where are these 100,000 point targets at on Buzz Lightyear’s Space Ranger Spin? The following will tell you which targets to aim for.



Have You Been To Every Attraction At Disney’s Magic Kingdom?

Click Here To Take The Magic Kingdom Quiz!

General Tips

Before I go into which targets to hit I want to point out a couple key tips on how to get the most out your ride experience.

The first tip is to hold down the trigger button . You do not need to keep pressing and releasing the trigger button to shoot. This only hurts your thumb. Hold down the trigger button the entire time you are on the ride and you will shoot your laser as fast as it will allow. Also to compensate for younger guests the ride awards points just for shooting so the more shots you take the more points you will receive.

. You do not need to keep pressing and releasing the trigger button to shoot. This only hurts your thumb. Hold down the trigger button the entire time you are on the ride and you will shoot your laser as fast as it will allow. Also to compensate for younger guests the ride awards points just for shooting so the more shots you take the more points you will receive. The next tip is to start aiming at targets in the next room before you get there . As you move from room to room you can start to focus on the better targets before you even get there. This allows you more time to line up your laser for those big point targets. This is especially helpful for the second room with the 100,000 point target.

. As you move from room to room you can start to focus on the better targets before you even get there. This allows you more time to line up your laser for those big point targets. This is especially helpful for the second room with the 100,000 point target. If you are having a hard time finding your laser with all the other lasers being shot around you, try aiming for a spot in the attraction that no one else is currently shooting at . This will allow you to easily spot your laser.

. This will allow you to easily spot your laser. When you do spot your laser you may notice that it may not be exactly centered, so knowing if your laser is shooting a bit to the left, right, high or low will help you compensate and more accurately hit the target you are aiming for.

The first 100,000 point target to go for is on the inner side of the left hand of the giant robot. (see picture below)

Ever Wonder What Walt Disney’s Favorite Attractions Were?

Click Here To See Walt Disney’s Favorite Attractions!

The next target is located at the bottom of Emporer Zurg’s Spaceship. (See Picture Below)

This target you will want to start aiming for before you even get into the room. Also as you are leaving the room keep shooting at it if you haven’t maxed out your score by then.

It is more difficult to hit this target when you are in the middle of the room because the guns only bend down so much, so the sooner you start shooting at it the better off you are. I usually max out my score on this target alone. (See picture below)

Now you know what to aim for. Next time you go to Buzz Lightyear’s Space Ranger Spin you are sure to get the rank of Galactic Hero!

Let us know if you were able to max out your score in the comments section below. Also if you know of any other high scoring targets 25,000 and above please share those as well.

To infinity and beyond!