Netanyahu stakes West Bank claim BelfastTelegraph.co.uk Israel's prime minister has declared his country would retain parts of the West Bank forever - a statement sure to provoke Palestinians and complicate the year-old peace mission of a visiting US envoy. https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/breakingnews/breakingnews_world/netanyahu-stakes-west-bank-claim-28514916.html https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/migration_catalog/article25671761.ece/b965e/AUTOCROP/h342/World%20News%204-1.jpg

Email

Israel's prime minister has declared his country would retain parts of the West Bank forever - a statement sure to provoke Palestinians and complicate the year-old peace mission of a visiting US envoy.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu laid claim to the disputed territory just hours after meeting with George Mitchell, the US's Middle East envoy.

Mitchell has been shuttling between Israeli and Palestinian leaders since late last week in hopes of breaking a deadlock over Israeli settlement construction.

"Our message is clear: We are planting here, we will stay here, we will build here, this place will be an inseparable part of the state of Israel for eternity," Mr Netanyahu proclaimed at a tree-planting ceremony celebrating Jewish Arbor Day at a settlement just south of Jerusalem.

Mr Netanyahu's participation in tree-planting ceremonies in two West Bank settlements were an apparent attempt to soothe Jewish settlers who vehemently oppose his decision, taken under intense US pressure, to slow West Bank construction.

Both settlements lie within areas Israel wants to keep in any final agreement with the Palestinians.

On the eve of Mitchell's arrival last week, Netanyahu said Israel would want to retain a presence in the West Bank even if a peace deal is reached with the Palestinians in order to protect Israel's heartland from missile attacks by militants.

The Palestinians claim all of the West Bank and east Jerusalem, captured by Israel in the 1967 Middle East war, for a future independent state and say settlements undermine this goal. They have refused to resume peacemaking until all settlement construction stops, something Netanyahu has refused to do.

Following his meeting with Mitchell, Netanyahu told his Cabinet he had heard "a few interesting ideas" on renewing peace talks. The US official later left Jerusalem for another meeting later in the day with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas in neighbouring Jordan.

Abbas' aide Nabil Abu Rdeneh said Mr Netanyahu's tree-planting Sunday undermined peace prospects. "This is an unacceptable act that destroys all the efforts being exerted by Senator Mitchell in order to bring the parties back to the negotiating table," he said.

Press Association