Barack Obama wants you to know that nuclear power is good for you. He really and truly does.

He’s warned of “the worst consequences of climate change” unless new nuclear plants sprout from the land. And of countries like China eating our technological lunch. And of unemployment getting even worse, due to the loss of good, green jobs. And of nothing less than “our economy, our security, and the future of our planet” being at risk.

He’s announced $8.3 billion in federal-loan guarantees to build a pair of nuclear reactors in Georgia (the first in the U.S. in more than 30 years), and said there will be plenty more where that came from. He’s appointed as energy secretary a Nobel laureate who’s pledged to “aggressively” expand nuclear power; nominated as his new commerce secretary the ex-C.E.O. of a power company that thought the world of its nuclear plants (including the two on the California coast adjacent to earthquake faults); and had successive White House energy czarinas who use the modifiers “safe, clean, reliable” when speaking of nuclear power — exactly like the ads of the industry’s trade association.

And what has Barack Obama gotten for his efforts? Trouble on all fronts.

The Greens are apoplectic at his “disastrous” . . . “nightmare” . . . “sell-out” policy, to quote the headlines of their blogs and articles. The polls, which used to report record-high approval of building U.S. nuclear plants, have switched to record-high disapproval—courtesy of the tsunami that left four reactors bathing northern Japan in radiation not seen since Nagasaki. And the Georgia loan guarantee? Turns out that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission hadn’t approved the safety of the reactor design (it still hasn’t); the project owner is one of the worst-polluting major power-plant companies in the world; and Energy Secretary Steven Chu—whose department oversees the guarantee program—had never heard of the “well above 50 percent” default rate projected by the Congressional Budget Office until reporters told him.

The capper: the same people who wooed Obama into being the nation’s chief advocate of spreading nuclear power now want no part of it.

How could such a smart guy have gotten into such a big mess?

A good slice of the answer has to do with Exelon, a utility company headquartered in Chicago with $18.6 billion in annual revenues, and America’s leading provider of nuclear-generated electricity.

Exelon is an enterprise of superlatives. It owns the largest “nuclear fleet” (17 reactors including seven General Electric Mark I models—the same type that formerly powered Fukushima Daiichi 1, 2, 3, and 4), turning out roughly 20 percent of all nuclear-generated electricity in the U.S. The 10 facilities dedicated to this activity include the country’s first (and after 43 years, now oldest) large-scale, commercially owned nuclear power plant, and TMI 1, surviving twin of the country’s most infamous, Three Mile Island 2. Exelon’s nuclear operations are counted the safest, most efficient, and most environmentally responsible in the industry. This, though, may be a tough sell in South Jersey, where in 2009 an Exelon nuclear plant leaked radioactive tritium into aquifers supplying the drinking water of more than one million residents.

As for political clout, it’s summed up by how Exelon’s former chief Washington lobbyist, Elizabeth Moler (who served as deputy national co-chair for the Obama campaign), described her employer to Forbes: “the President’s utility.”

How Exelon acquired that title—and in the process changed the fortunes of Rahm Emanuel, David Axelrod, and State Senator Barack Obama, is—like the workings of nuclear power plants—complicated.

The simplified version skips several twists. Such as: Thomas G. Ayers—father of retired Weatherman bomber Bill Ayers—having once been C.E.O. of Exelon forebear Commonwealth Edison; Bill’s wife, 60s *über-*radical Bernardine Dohrn, and future First Lady Michelle Obama overlapping as associates at ComEd’s principal outside legal counsel; and two other coincidences—recent Harvard Law grad Barack chairing a public-education group his friend Bill helped found, and both men serving as board members of a private anti-poverty foundation.

Instead, it goes right to the meat of the story, which begins with Obama’s election to the Illinois state senate, in 1996. On arrival in Springfield, he comes under the tutelage of Democratic state senator Emil Jones, perhaps the most powerful black politician in the state, and most assuredly ComEd’s best friend in the capital. Jones, in turn, introduces him to Chicago-black-establishment member Frank M. Clark, chief state lobbyist for ComEd, and a campaign-contributions spigot. Clark comes away impressed, and ComEd begins investing in Obama’s political career.

ComEd itself, however, is not doing so well. Customers are in impotent dudgeon about utility rates--among the highest in the nation--and ComEd’s operation of its nuclear plants spook even the industry-chummy U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Pain is complete when the Republican-controlled Illinois legislature cuts ComEd rates by 20 percent in 1997, and freezes them at that level for 10 years.

The effects are beginning to bite when Rahm Emanuel, Chicago-born Clinton White House political aide, lunches with a senior executive of boutique investment banker Wasserstein Perella. One thing leads to another, and Emanuel—whose Rolodex more than makes up for zero investment-banking experience—is appointed managing director of Wasserstein Perella’s Chicago office. His first deal is a doozy: the $8.2 billion merger of Philadelphia-based PECO Energy and Chicago-based Unicom, parent of ComEd.

The transaction is one of the biggest Emanuel makes during his sojourn with Wasserstein Perella, which pays him a total of $18.5 million for 30 months of service. The fruit of his handiwork christens itself Exelon and names a new C.E.O.: John W. Rowe, lawyer and passionate Egyptologist. Rowe installs a 2,600-year-old sarcophagus in his office and then sets out to raise ComEd from the dead. One of his first moves is trimming 3,350 jobs, among them that of a quality-assurance auditor, who’d warned that the concrete casks ComEd is purchasing to store high-level radioactive waste have critical design flaws.

Back in Springfield, Democrats reclaim the legislature, and in 2003 Jones becomes senate president. Obama informs his good friend he’s now in a position to make the next U.S. senator.

“Do you know of anyone?” Jones asks.

“Me,” Obama replies.

All at once, Obama’s name begins appearing on virtually every piece of major legislation. Profile increases, senatorial nomination follows.

Obama proves dexterous at fielding nuclear-power questions in the run-up to November 2004. The first part of his answer—“[should] remain on the table for consideration”—moves the Nuclear Energy Institute to congratulate him for “keeping an open mind.” The second—that, as senator, “a major priority” will be figuring how to store nuclear waste and ensure that plants are safe—wins the love of enviros. Equally pleased Exelon executives and employees contribute some $70,000 to his win.

Payback time arrives with the looming expiration of the rate freeze, which ComEd wants ended. Obama helps out by starring in a photo op at a notoriously troubled ComEd nuclear station. He provides more tangible assistance by voting to kill an amendment to the Bush administration’s 2005 energy legislation, which would have abolished nuclear-power loan guarantees.

In Chicago, meanwhile, David Axelrod, co-founder of the political consulting firm ASK Public Strategies, creates a television commercial intended as centerpiece of the effort to defrost the freeze. Axelrod knows ComEd well. As media adviser to Mayor Richard M. Daley during the early-90s power outages, he had told the press, “Everybody hates Commonwealth Edison.” His commercial’s message is different: without rate increases, ComEd goes bust, lights switch off, staggering bills result—à la the California energy crisis.

Listed as sponsor is a group called core (Consumers Organized for Reliable Electricity). In fact, the ad, and the rest of the $15 million campaign, is funded lock and stock by ComEd. When the truth surfaces, hired gun Axelrod says, “No one ever denied [it].”

The ad succeeds. And after Jones—beneficiary of a ComEd-hosted fund-raiser that brings in $127,000—streamrolls state-senate opposition, the freeze lifts and ComEd gets an almost 25 percent increase.

The presidential campaign of Barack Obama—whom Jones has taken to calling “my godson”—prospers as well. Exelon-connected contributions amount to at least $220,000. And Frank Clark, now ComEd chairman, serves as a key contribution “bundler”—bringing in more than $200,000. He also donates $28,500 of his own money to Obama-supporting committees. Exelon board member John W. Rogers Jr., founder of the first black-owned mutual-fund company and ex-husband of Barack-and-Michelle intimate and White House social-secretary-to-be Desirée Rogers, is an even bigger bundler. He totes half a million plus.

En route to the White House, Obama backs new nuke building—so long, he says, as plants are safe and a place is found to stick their nuclear waste for, say, 40,000 years. Anywhere, that is, other than swing-state Nevada, home of Senate majority leader Harry Reid. Occasionally, however, Obama’s predilection for having it both ways gets the best of him—as when he tells the editorial board of the Keene, New Hampshire, Sentinel that the only trouble with nuclear power is “the fact that it might blow up . . . and irradiate us . . . and kill us.”

None of which diminishes the post-inaugural joy. “It’s nice for John [Rowe] to be able to go to the White House and they know his name,” an Exelon executive tells a reporter. Rowe’s welcome is especially warm at the office of new chief of staff Rahm Emanuel. And no wonder: it hadn’t been Rahm who called Rowe for the deal that creates Exelon and makes him millions; according to Rahm, it had been Rowe calling him, offering it. They’ve been buds since—so close, The Washington Post quotes Rowe as saying, that Rahm had phoned from a bookstore for his advice, while agonizing over Obama’s job offer.

Rowe proves a handy ally in the battle over carbon “cap and trade,” the central element of Obama’s climate legislation, which allows dirty power plants to buy pollution credits from clean ones, or pay the feds for the privilege of poisoning the atmosphere. Rowe, who’s been a cap-and-trade proponent since before Obama’s election to the state senate, goes all out. He appears in a TV ad, testifies before Congress, chats up the press, pulls Exelon out of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce for its C&T opposition. When Obama shies from twisting arms of wavering Senate Democrats, Rowe, at Rahm’s request, mans up and does the chore.

Rowe’s labors are not entirely altruistic. A big winner if cap and trade passes will be Exelon, which, by its own estimate, stands to gross an extra billion annually.

But nothing can save “cap and tax,” as Republicans brand it, and climate legislation never comes to a Senate vote.

By then Rowe is reaching for the eject lever. He’s read the signs, and from Obama’s $12 billion write-off of the nuclear-waste repository at Yucca Mountain, Nevada, to the collapse of natural-gas prices and electricity demand, they ain’t good. Rowe bluntly says so in an address to the no-friend-of-Obama’s American Enterprise Institute. Asked what he wants from Congress now, he answers: “Nothing.” Three days later, the worst of worst-case scenarios descends on Japan, whose nuclear-plant example Obama has said the U.S. should emulate. “It would be stupid for us not to,” as he put it during an appearance in New Orleans in October 2009.

The news since has only piled on embarrassment. This spring, investigations by the G.A.O., ProPublica, and the A.P. confirmed what anti-nuclear activists have long said. Namely, that three-quarters of U.S. nuclear power plants are leaking radioactive tritium from corroded pipes buried decades ago; that preparations for grand-scale disaster are effectively nonexistent; that emergency equipment is either broken, missing, in bad repair, or inoperable at more than half of U.S. nuclear plants; and that the N.R.C.—the nation’s supposed nuclear watchdog—responds to violations of safety regulations by inviting industry to help loosen them.

The N.R.C. came in for more pounding in June with the revelation that its Obama-appointed chairman, longtime senior Harry Reid staffer Gregory Jaczko, had buried a 733-page staff study, which found Yucca Mountain not nearly as bad as advertised. Its findings would have remained interred, but for a report by the agency’s inspector general that Jaczko deliberately kept Congress and his fellow commissioners clueless. Republican calls for Jaczko’s head ensued, to the accompaniment of senior N.R.C. staff denouncing their boss in hearings on Capitol Hill for being “ineffective in upholding the integrity of this agency.” In a public statement Jaczko noted that the inspector general’s report concluded that his actions “have been and remain consistent with established law, guidance, and my authorities as Chairman.”

Obama had no comment about these developments. C.E.O. Rowe has ceased airing views on the administration’s nuclear policies altogether. (He also declined to speak to Vanity Fair.) Before the silence set in, he did say that Exelon wouldn’t be building new nuclear power plants anytime soon, and that for at least a decade or two, no one who could read a P&L statement would be, either. He also began diversifying into wind energy; added a natural-gas plant to the four Exelon already owns; and, by acquiring Constellation Energy of Baltimore, snapped up five old nuclear reactors for a lot less than the cost of building a new one. When that deal’s wrapped, he’s retiring.

Barack Obama trudges on, regardless. “We’ve got to recognize that nuclear power, if it’s safe, can make a significant contribution to the climate change question,” he said in March, unveiling his plan to cut to oil imports a third by 2020. “We can’t simply take if off the table.”

Oh, the amount of U.S. electricity generated by oil from all sources, foreign and domestic? One percent.