Used Tesla Inc. Model S sedans sell faster than luxury-car competitors do, and faster than other top-selling used vehicles from Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Co.

That’s according to a survey by the car-shopping platform Autolist.com, which compared the Model S, the first car to be entirely built and designed by Tesla TSLA, -0.30% with a peer group that included luxury sedans from car makers such as Volkswagen AG’s VW, -1.08% Audi, Toyota Motor Co.’s 7203, +0.31% Lexus, and Daimler AG’s DAI, -0.54% Mercedes-Benz, as well as popular vehicles from GM GM, -0.07% and Ford F, +1.37% .

Related: Tesla fans, Barclays has a ‘reality pill’ for you

Used Model S sedans had the briefest time on the market of all vehicles included in the survey, taking, on average, 87 days to sell. That was about 5% quicker than the average for vehicles in the model’s peer group, which included the Audi A7, the Porsche Panamera, the BMW 6 Series, the Mercedes-Benz CLS and the Lexus LS 460.

The listing prices of used Tesla Model S sedans were between 3% and 5% above their peer-group average for the past year, after controlling for price differences among the models, Autolist.com said.

“We would expect top-performing vehicles in a peer group to have prices [about] 2% above our adjusted expectations for the segment. But 3% to 5% above, and maintaining that level of performance over the past year? That’s surprising,” Alex Klein, Autolist.com’s vice president of data science, said in emailed comments.

See also: Why Tesla is getting rid of its cheapest model

Top-selling GM and Ford models, including the Ford F-150 pickup truck (the No. 1 vehicle sold in the U.S.), the Chevrolet Silverado 1500 pickup, the Chevrolet Malibu and the Ford Fusion, have seen prices hover between 1% below and 1% above their peers over the past year, Autolist.com said.

The GM and Ford models also cooled their heels on used-car lots and in owners’ garages for longer: 104 days for the F-150, 103 days for the Chevy Malibu and 88 days for the Ford Fusion.

Tesla shares closed at their highest ever price Monday, at $312.39, the latest on a string of records closes. Shares have gained about 40% so far this year, nearly 10 times as much as the S&P 500 index SPX, -0.08% The stock had dipped below the $300 mark by Thursday afternoon.

The upward march in Tesla shares started when the company reported first-quarter sales that were on the higher end of Wall Street expectations, which fueled hopes that Tesla would be freed up to focus on the launch of the Model 3, the $35,000 the car that the Silicon Valley company hopes to bring to market by the end of the year.

See: After leapfrogging Ford, Tesla is neck and neck with GM for must-valuable-car-manufacturer crown