Four former Marion County sheriff's deputies received prison sentences Wednesday afternoon in connection with the use of excessive force.

OCALA — Four former Marion County sheriff's deputies were sentenced to prison terms Wednesday afternoon for their roles in a violent drug arrest in 2014.



All had previously pleaded guilty in federal court to deprivation of rights under color of law in connection with the Aug. 7, 2014 beating of Derrick Price in a Marion Oaks parking lot. The former deputies, who resigned before pleading guilty in 2015, testified at the trial of their co-defendant, Jesse Terrell, who was acquitted.



Two of the four deputies pleaded guilty on other counts, and thus their sentences were slightly longer.



Senior U.S. District Judge William Terrell Hodges sentenced them as follows:



• Trevor Fitzgerald: One year and one day in prison and three years of probation.



• James Amidei: One year and one day in prison and three years of probation.



• Adam Crawford: 14 months in prison and three years of probation. He had also pleaded guilty to obstruction of justice.



• Cody Hoppel: 14 months in prison and three years of probation. He had also pleaded guilty in connection with a separate beating incident that involved Dustin Heathman, who’s currently serving life imprison for shooting at deputies during a standoff in June 2014.



The charges carried maximum prison sentences of 10 years or more, although sentencing guidelines called for much lesser punishments. Prosecutors had argued for relative leniency in light of the men's cooperation at the Terrell trial and in other investigations.



“Mr. Price and his legal team thanks the U.S. attorney for their diligence and advocacy on his behalf and behalf of the U.S. Constitution,” said Price’s attorney, Michael Barbarette of Gainesville, after the sentencing Wednesday.



The sentences were handed down shortly after court reconvened from lunch. The restart time was supposed to be 2 p.m., but when the judge sat down he apologized for returning late. He said he had been giving "deep thought" to the cases, which he called “a tragic set of circumstances” for all.



Federal sentencing guidelines, which are advisory in nature, allowed enhanced penalties in this case because the men were working in official capacities, the victim was restrained, and the men obstructed efforts to investigate what occurred by making false statements and filing false paperwork.



By the same token, the U.S. Attorney's Office sought --- and Hodges granted --- permission to reduce the guideline range in light of the men's cooperation in this case and subsequent investigations. They also received points for admitting guilt and accepting responsibility for what they had done, and for having clean criminal records.



Hodges further noted that the former deputies have impeccable backgrounds. The pre-sentence documents that defense counsel filed included numerous letters of support and character references, and a few people also spoke in court Wednesday. No lethal force was used against Price. No weapons were used.



Once all the scoring was complete, the guidelines provided a sentencing range of 18 to 24 months in prison for Fitzgerald, Amidei and Crawford, and 24 to 30 months for Hoppel. The men's defense attorneys all sought probation and no time behind bars.



The judge said there were a number of factor he had to consider when deciding on sentences, the most important of which were acknowledging the seriousness of the offense, promoting respect for the law, and ensuring general deterrence so that this type of behavior does not occur again among law enforcement officials.



The defense noted that Fitzgerald and Amidei did not strike Price; rather, they failed to intervene during the beating and then lied about what happened during the subsequent investigation. A security video that caught the incident on tape shows Fitzgerald sitting on Price’s legs so he could handcuff him --- a move consistent with law enforcement training --- while Amidei, who arrived during the beating, walked around aimlessly.



Hoppel and Crawford, by contrast, were actively involved in Price’s beating.



At 2:38 p.m., after a comprehensive airing of his observations, thoughts, and the relevant legal points and precedents, Hodges started with Fitzgerald and Amidei and then addressed the other two. As he imposed sentence some people in the audience cried. Crawford hung his head, hands in face.



Hodges said the four have 14 days to file an appeal. With no one objecting to his ruling or wanting to speak, court was adjourned at 2:45 p.m.



Outside the courtroom, one of Hoppel’s lawyer, Matt Luka, said it may take weeks or even months before the sentenced men actually report to the facility to serve their time. The federal Bureau of Prisons needs to classify the men, weighing factors such as their vulnerability as former law officers, and then figure out where to send them.



The hearing, held in a packed courtroom at the federal courthouse in downtown Ocala, started at 9 a.m. The morning was spent handling procedural matters and legal points, most of which concerned the sentencing ranges the men should face.



Before the 12:46 p.m. lunch break, family and friends spoke on behalf of the men. The judge said people who had submitted support letters to the court didn't need to speak.



The supporters began speaking at 11:16 a.m., starting with Amidei’s two father-in-laws, Larry Bryan and Hubert Martin. Martin’s daughter, who was once married to Amidei, calls his former son-in-law as “a great father,” and never had a problem with him. Bryan said Amidei is “an excellent father,” and didn’t want him to go to prison because of the impact it will have on the family.



Amidei apologized, saying “I failed him (Price) that day.” He ended by saying that the justice system will never see him again.



Therese Truelove, Amidei’s lawyer, talked about his military history with the U.S. Navy and noted that he showed Price compassion by moving his handcuffs from his back to the front and even giving him a drink.



John Gleason, a horse trainer at Woodford Thoroughbreds, where Hoppel works as an assistant trainer, said Hoppel’s work ethic “is second to none."



Hoppel’s brother, Jesse, said his brother is his “best friend” and has won multiple awards and honors. He said the time since the Price arrest has affected his brother’s life emotionally and physically.



Hoppel went to the podium and apologized to everyone and asked for the court’s leniency.



Luka gave three reasons why the judge should show mercy on Hoppel. One of them was that, according to Hoppel, the Sheriff's Office condoned, encouraged and tolerated the type of behavior that was seen on Aug. 7, 2014. He said his client is “highly decorated,” and “took his job very seriously.”



In a related development outside the courtroom, Sheriff Chris Blair on Wednesday announced that the Brevard County Sheriff's Office has agreed to review Blair's agency and investigate cases that the five ex-deputies handled. This move was prompted, in part, by testimony during Terrell's trial claiming that other abuse-of-force cases exist.



Mike Sawyer, the attorney for Fitzgerald, said his client has no history of beating anyone and he just sat on Price’s legs so he could handcuff him.



Fitzgerald apologized for his actions and to Price and asked for mercy.



Wiping away tears, Crawford also apologized to everyone and said he regrets what happened on the day Price was beaten. He said he takes full responsibility.



Federal prosecutor Mark Blumberg, an expert litigator from the Justice Department's civil rights division, said the men testified truthfully against Terrell, and he believes they had reflected on their actions and discovered some unpleasant truths.



But, he added, were it not for the security camera that captured the incident on tape, no one would have come forward to report what had happened. Price himself expressed disbelief that anyone in officialdom was taking the case seriously. By his reckoning, police mistreatment of African-Americans --- Price is black; the five former deputies are white --- is both endemic and ignored.



Contact Austin L. Miller at 867-4118, austin.miller@starbanner.com or @almillerosb.