Islamic Awakening

The fact of the matter is that the Islamic Ummah has long been neglecting itself. The present scientific and technological retardation and the low status in the areas of politics, industry and economy are the bitter outcome of this negligence. And now, considering the great change that has occurred or is taking place in the world, the Islamic Ummah should try to make up for its past neglect. Fortunately, some phenomena of the present age promise the beginning of this remedial move.

Undoubtedly, the world’s arrogant powers regard the awakening of Muslims and Islamic unity and also the progress of Islamic nations in the fields of science, politics and innovation as the most serious obstacles to their global hegemony and domination, and thus they are doing their utmost to undermine and oppose them. Muslim nations have already experienced colonial and neocolonial eras. Considering that we are now in an era of ultramodern colonialism, we should learn from our previous experience and not allow the enemies to once again dominate our fate for another long period.

In those dark and bitter eras, the dominant Western powers applied all their cultural, economic, political and military means to weaken Islamic countries and nations and imposed upon them division and discord, poverty and ignorance. The dereliction, indolence and lack of confidence of many of our politicians and the irresponsibility of many of our cultural elites were of great benefit to those powers. The end result was the plundering of our wealth, the disposal and even denial of our identity and the destruction of our independence. We, Islamic nations, grew weaker as time went by, and covetous, domination-seeking plunderers became stronger day by day.

Now that, owing to the self-sacrifice of devoted strivers and valor and sincerity of Islamic leaders in various parts of the Islamic world, the waves of Islamic awakening are moving forward and motivating youngsters, intellectuals and ordinary people in many Islamic countries, and now that the treacherous face of domination-seeking powers has been exposed to many Muslim leaders and statesmen, arrogant powers are once again seeking new stratagems to continue and consolidate their domination of the Islamic world. The slogans advocating democracy and human rights are among these stratagems.

Today, the Great Satan, which is itself the embodiment of evil and cruelty against mankind, has raised the banner of advocating human rights and is inviting nations in the Middle East to embrace democracy. What the United States is trying to do in these countries under the guise of democracy is to install submissive and obedient politicians with the help of machinations, bribes and misleading propaganda and through apparently popular but actually rigged elections, the politicians who will become U.S. tools for achieving its wicked, domineering goals.

One of the major goals pursued by the United States is to suppress the waves of Islamic awakening and once again drive Islamic values into isolation. All the political and propaganda tools of the United States and other hegemonic powers are being utilized to delay the Islamic awakening movement and, if possible, to suppress it.

Today, Muslim nations should be completely vigilant and watchful. The Ulema and religious scholars, intellectuals and academics, writers and poets and artists, youngsters and elites should all, through their awareness and timely measures, prevent the world-devouring United States from initiating a new era of its colonial dominance over the Islamic world.

The slogans advocating democracy cannot be accepted from those hegemonic powers that have supported dictatorial regimes in Asia, Africa and the American Continent for long years. It is abominable to hear claims of countering violence and terrorism from those promoting Zionist terrorism and perpetrating the bloodiest acts of violence in Iraq and Afghanistan. Claiming to support civil rights by those devils that have always admired and encouraged crimes committed by a bloodthirsty terrorist like Sharon against oppressed Palestinians is a trick and deception deserving curse and damnation.

The perpetrators of crimes in Guantanamo and AbuGhuraib and secret prisons in Europe, the humiliators of Iraqi and Palestinian nations and the fosterers of certain groups which, in the name of Islam, regard as permissible the shedding of the blood of Muslims in Iraq and Afghanistan have no right to talk about human rights.American and British governments, which consider themselves authorized to torture suspects and even shed their blood in the streets, and which even regard as permissible listening to the private telephone conversations of their citizens without a judicial order, are not entitled to pose as the advocates of civil rights.The governments that have brought disgrace upon their contemporary history by manufacturing atomic and chemical weapons and deploying these weapons have no right to call themselves custodians of the nonproliferation of nuclear technology.

Muslim brothers and sisters!

Today, the world, especially the Islamic world, is going through a sensitive period. On the one hand, the waves of Islamic awakening are sweeping across the Islamic world; and on the other hand, the treacherous faces of the United States and other arrogant powers, which were so far hidden behind a veil of deception and hypocrisy, have now been exposed.

On the one hand, nations in some parts of the Islamic world have launched a campaign to restore their identity and sovereignty; and in the Islamic Iran, a great sovereign state, the saplings of independent, native science and technology have flourished and are bearing fruit, and the self-confidence which had given impetus to activities in political and social spheres has now influenced efforts in the fields of science and construction.

On the other hand, the gaps of weakness and degeneration have appeared in the political and military ranks of the enemies.Today, Iraq, Palestine and Lebanon have turned into exhibition halls displaying the weakness and helplessness of a pompous power like the United States and the Zionists. U.S. policy toward the Middle East has faced a major obstacle in the preliminary steps, and the failure in this policy has backfired on those who had engineered it.