Yet the various plans — and the Venn diagram of their overlaps and outliers — offer hints as to what the actual budget will look like when it’s adopted at the end of March. (If it’s adopted then: Mr. Cuomo has a six-year record of on-time or close-to-on-time budgets on the line.) Democrats trumpeted social programs, ethics reform and housing, while Republicans pressed on jobs, deregulation and economic development.

Their resolutions, which basically serve as opening bids in the budget talks, also indicate what may be kumbaya compromises — more funding for education (a perennial Democratic priority), a college affordability plan (recently lauded by the governor), and money for water infrastructure and heroin treatment (which Republicans have claimed as issues). The resolutions also reveal what could the major sticking point in negotiations, namely how much the state’s richest residents will pay in taxes, including the so-called millionaires’ tax, an extension of which Mr. Cuomo has characterized as critical to funding his agenda, and which the Republicans have resisted.

The debate over the resolutions also gave an outlet for simmering anger between members of the Independent Democrats and the Senate Democratic Conference. Members of the Independent Democratic Conference have been repeatedly accused by fellow Democrats of opportunism, because of their alliance with Republicans — an arrangement that has afforded them perks like larger offices and staffs, and committee chairmanships. That bad blood has only gotten worse since the Independent Democrats lured three new members in recent months, prompting a backlash in some districts.

On Wednesday, that animus erupted as one new member of the Independent Democratic Conference, Senator Marisol Alcantara, called Senator Michael Gianaris, the deputy leader of the Senate Democrats, a “white man with a degree from Harvard” using “his white privilege,” after Mr. Gianaris suggested that the Independent Democrats were enabling President Trump’s agenda.

Calls for order and decorum in the chamber followed — including from Mr. Gianaris — but Ms. Alcantara continued to press her point. “I would like to know how many times my colleague has been called the N-word,” she said, before mentioning another racial epithet and other incidents of racial prejudice.