Britain First and anti-fascists to march in Bromley town centre this weekend

Bromley High Street Archant

Met Police have put a plan in place for the protests

Share Email this article to a friend To send a link to this page you must be logged in.

Politicians have united against Britain First’s plans to march through Bromley town centre this weekend.

The protest comes as the party’s leaders, Paul Golding, 35 and Jayda Fransen, 31, face charges of religiously aggravated assault.

The pair claim they have to sign a register at Bromley Police station at 2pm on Saturday as part of their bail conditions, and are set to bring more than 100 of their supporters with them on Saturday.

Opposition has been raised immediately, with a senior Unite Against Fascism campaigner saying a counter-protest at Bromley North station could reach a similar size.

In a unique display of unity, the Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat and Green parties issued a joint statement against the march.

A spokesperson on behalf of the parties said: “We have put party politics aside to come together in united opposition to the appearance of a fascist group walking through our town.

“We will stand together in quiet solidarity in Bromley on Saturday to make it clear that this group does not represent the views of the people of Bromley.

“We are an inclusive and all-embracing community in Bromley, we are enriched by our friends, family and work colleagues who come from all corners of the world, who represent all religions and all ethnic backgrounds.

“They are part of our community and we will stand resolute against anyone who seeks to divide us.”

Met Police says it has put an “appropriate policing plan” in place for both protests.

A case management hearing for Mr Golding, a former BNP councillor in Swanley and Ms Fransen, who both live in Penge, has been scheduled for November 29 at Folkestone Magistrates Court.

Their appearance follows concerns over their alleged behaviour during the trial of three men and a teenager who were later convicted of rape.