Dr. Paul Marik believes he's found a better way to treat a deadly infection that kills millions of people each year.

A combination therapy of vitamins C, B and corticosteroids, Marik's treatment costs about $60 a dose. Its components are readily available at most hospitals.

"My intention was never to discover the cure for sepsis," said Marik, chief of pulmonary and critical medicine and professor of internal medicine at Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk. "It just kind of happened by mistake."

Sepsis is the killer illness many don't know about. It's caused by the body's response to a serious infection. The germs multiply, enter the body and multiply more, causing a potentially deadly illness with organ and tissue damage, according to the Centers for Disease Control. If not caught quickly, sepsis is fatal, the federal agency reports.

"It's like three jumbo jets crashing every day, and everyone on board dying. That's how many are killed every day by sepsis," Marik said.

Sepsis is one of the most costly illnesses and one of the top causes of deaths in hospitals. Physicians, pharmaceutical companies and labs have worked for decades on a sepsis cure but haven't found it. After more than 200 successful outcomes on patients at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, Marik said his treatment is the cure.

Paul E. Marik, MD, EVMS Foundation Distinguished Professor in Internal Medicine and Chief of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine has developed a sucessful treatment for sepsis, an infection that kills around 1,000 people nationally each day. (Joe Fudge/Daily Press) (Joe Fudge/Daily Press)

The professor coordinated with other doctors to study the drug combination in a lab, which confirmed it was effective against sepsis. His results — positive outcomes for 50 patients — were recently published in CHEST, a medical journal from the American College of Chest Physicians.

"We can't cure their cancer. We can't cure their dementia, but we can cure their sepsis," Marik said.

Other physicians have been cautious about the new treatment, suggesting it needs more testing.

CAPTION Why fat is essential to your diet. Health organizations have spread confusing messages about fat over the years. Fat has been blamed for the obesity epidemic and rising rates of heart disease. It turns out that fat is actually very important for our health. Why fat is essential to your diet. Health organizations have spread confusing messages about fat over the years. Fat has been blamed for the obesity epidemic and rising rates of heart disease. It turns out that fat is actually very important for our health. CAPTION Why fat is essential to your diet. Health organizations have spread confusing messages about fat over the years. Fat has been blamed for the obesity epidemic and rising rates of heart disease. It turns out that fat is actually very important for our health. Why fat is essential to your diet. Health organizations have spread confusing messages about fat over the years. Fat has been blamed for the obesity epidemic and rising rates of heart disease. It turns out that fat is actually very important for our health. CAPTION Insulin costs in the US doubled from 2012 to 2016. A Type 1 diabetes patient could expect to pay $2,864 for insulin in 2012. By 2016, the cost had practically doubled to $5,705. The findings were released in a report from the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI). Insulin costs in the US doubled from 2012 to 2016. A Type 1 diabetes patient could expect to pay $2,864 for insulin in 2012. By 2016, the cost had practically doubled to $5,705. The findings were released in a report from the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI). CAPTION Cardiovascular disease is the No. 1 cause of death worldwide. Try these foods to strengthen your heart. Cardiovascular disease is the No. 1 cause of death worldwide. Try these foods to strengthen your heart. CAPTION First New Flu Drug in Almost 20 Years Is Approved by FDA Xofluza is a single dose, oral prescription drug to relieve symptoms of the flu. First New Flu Drug in Almost 20 Years Is Approved by FDA Xofluza is a single dose, oral prescription drug to relieve symptoms of the flu. CAPTION Cases of West Nile virus have been reported in every U.S. state except Hawaii so far this year. Research suggests that West Nile virus risks are higher due to climate change. Cases of West Nile virus have been reported in every U.S. state except Hawaii so far this year. Research suggests that West Nile virus risks are higher due to climate change.

"It is research, but it is a very small study," Dr. Jim O'Brien, chairman of the board of directors for the Sepsis Alliance said in an interview with Health News Review. "It's an observational study, not a blinded and randomized clinical trial. So we need more rigorous, larger and well-designed studies to see if the results hold up." The Sepsis Alliance is a charitable organization set up to educate people about the illness and find a cure.

Former U.S. Food and Drug Administration head Dr. Robert Califf told NPR, "Nothing has worked despite all the great ideas people have had, often ballyhooed with observational data like this, claiming that it's a big effect."

"So I'd say the odds are still that it doesn't work," Califf says, "but every once in a while something works in an unexpected way."

Marik says he expected pushback from doctors but overwhelmingly the feedback has been positive. He's received more than 100 emails and other messages from doctors around the country who first scoffed at his sepsis treatment, then tried it when a patient's life hung in the balance. It worked, Marik said. Since doctors began using the combination therapy at Norfolk Sentara more than a year ago, they haven't had a sepsis death, Marik said.

Sentara Norfolk General Hospital President Kurt Hofelich said Sentara is expanding the hospital's research into additional ICUs to validate the benefits across a much larger group of patients.

"We hypothesize that this new treatment will evolve into a national best practice and a new standard of care for patients with sepsis in an ICU level of care environment," Hofelich said in a news release.

Marik has also been around the country and overseas to talk about the treatment.

"The magic of this treatment is that it's free. No one is going to make money from it, but we can use it to save lives," Marik said. "What we need to do is more formal studies to prove the obvious — this treatment works."

Norfolk resident Anne Hobbs almost lost her mother to sepsis. She believes Marik's treatment saved Valerie Hobbs' life.

"She was dying. I expected to lose her that night," said Anne Hobbs. "(Marik) told us to prepare for it."

Valerie Hobbs was the first successful patient to receive Marik's treatment. Anne Hobbs credits him for her mother's turnaround. Roughly a year later, her mother is doing well and is able to do what she loves — going to church.

"Two things brought her back — the treatment the doctor used and the power of prayer," Anne Hobbs said.

Canty can be reached by phone at 757-247-4832.