New cars of 2009

The year 2009 has seen a revolution in the automobile industry with each model coming in new designs, fuel economy and performance. With almost all the models coming with new engineering aspects, it is hard to make a judgment on the best new cars of 2009.

Here we can discuss a few of the cars that come top among all the models.

Cadillac CTS-V

Coming in great style and power, Cadillac CTS-V is one of the best cars of 2009. A great car on the roads, Cadillac CTS-V is laser fine and has a powerful V8 engine which displays a hose power of 556 hp. It runs 0-60 in 3.9 seconds. The genteel look and a super engine make it a top class car of 2009.

Chevrolet Corvette ZR1

Then there is the Chevrolet Corvette ZR1, which gives a thrilling experience on the roads. Charged with a V 8 engine and accelerating at 638 hp, the Chevrolet Corvette ZR1 is a class. It comes with a stylish interior and exterior, which gives it a magnificent look; really a super car of 2009.

Honda Fit

When talking about the best cars of 2009, one cannot miss Honda Fit, which comes in great fuel efficiency. A car of the new generation, Honda Fit gives a comfortable travelling. You can take the car for long drives with all your family members and the luggage, as the Honda Fit is so spacious. Very reasonably priced, the Honda Fit is equipped with a quite powerful engine that gives back fuel economy.

Hyundai Genesis

No one can just ignore Hyundai Genesis. A luxury sedan, the Hyundai Genesis comes close to Lexus LS460. A large sedan, Hyundai Genesis has a beautiful look, both from the exterior and interior. It comes with a powerful V8, 375 hp engine, which renders a smooth drive. The name Hyundai is enough to top the list of the best cars of 2009.

Mazda 6

A mid sized sedan, the Mazda 6 is a family car. The Mazda 6 comes with enough space and fuel efficiency. Coming with a four-cylinder engine, the Mazda 6 is so splendid to drive. Moreover, on the safety side, the Mazda 6 is excellent.

Mercedes-Benz SL63 AMG

Coming in 6.2 L V 8 engine, the Mercedes-Benz SL63 AMG is so powerful on the roads. It is the beauty, inside and outside, that makes Mercedes-Benz SL63 AMG a favourite of 2009.

Mitsubishi Lancer Ralliart

The Lancer Ralliart from Mitsubishi is another car that makes it to the top best cars of 2009. The Ralliart comes with a powerful 2 L turbo engine, twin clutch auto transmission and all-wheel-drive. Well, the lancer Ralliart is very comfortable and delivers the best drive for the family.

Pontiac Vibe

The Pontiac Vibe is really a fantastic car of 2009 with a stylish exterior and roomy interior. The Pontiac Vibe gives a smooth drive on the roads as it comes with standard suspensions. The car is a joint venture between Toyota and General Motors.

Volkswagen Jetta TDI

The Volkswagen Jetta TDI is car that cannot be ignored in 2009. The turbo diesel 2 L engine, meeting all emission standards, is really eco friendly. With a great acceleration and a powerful engine, the Volkswagen Jetta TDI is a miracle on the roads.

Porsche 911 Carrera

With new powerful engines, revised style and a new twin clutch auto transmission, the Porsche 911 Carrera makes a difference. This sports car delivers a smooth drive with all safety measures. The Porsche 911 Carrera is a great choice of 2009.

Subaru Impreza WRX

Though there is a lukewarm response for the Subaru Impreza WRX, it has been rated one of the best cars of 2009. This all-new WRX performs splendidly on the roads especially on the curves. It is great fun to drive Subaru Impreza WRX.