Investigators from the Homicide Group in conjunction with Moreton District CIB believe new scientific processes will help them progress a ten year double homicide investigation.

On May 28, 2004 April Bailey and her brother Ian were located deceased inside their home in Warren Crescent Deception Bay. The house had been destroyed by a fire, believed to have been lit at 1:50pm.

Forensic examinations and investigations revealed the pair had been killed prior to the fire.

Three triple zero calls were made around the time of the fire, one believed to have captured the scream of Ian Bailey prior to the fire being lit. A second call to triple zero believed to have been from a phone accessed by April’s four-year-old daughter contains an argument which can be heard in the background. A third triple zero call was made by neighbours alerting authorities to the fire.

“In addition to the voice identification processes being conducted on the second call, expert examinations are currently being conducted on a military style knife and matching scabbard located at the scene,” Detective Inspector Damien Hansen of the Homicide Group said.

In January 2006, the Queensland Government announced a $250,000 reward to information leading to the apprehension and conviction of those responsible for the murders of April and Ian and the arson of the residence.

In addition an indemnity from prosecution will be recommended for any accomplice, not believed to have been the person who committed the crime, who provides information to police.

Homicide investigators commenced a review of the cold case homicide and have been working alongside regional officers.

“As you can imagine forensic and scientific processes have certainly advance in the time since the murders and we have applied these processes to evidence located at the scene. The new information relating to the weapons located at the scene in conjunction with these advances leaves us confident we can achieve a positive outcome in this investigation,” Detective Inspector Hansen said.

April’s four-year-old daughter was located uninjured at the scene of the fire.

The photo below is of April and Ian Bailey.

If you have information for police, contact Policelink on 131 444 or provide information using the online form 24hrs per day.

You can report information about crime anonymously to Crime Stoppers, a registered charity and community volunteer organisation, by calling 1800 333 000 or via crimestoppersqld.com.au 24hrs per day.