The president's recent actions have made House Democrats feel more welcome. Obama and liberals hug it out

President Barack Obama hasn’t unified and engaged Democrats this much since election night 2008.

For all the Democratic priorities Obama’s addressed in office, he’s often left his base disappointed and frustrated that he didn’t go further or fight Republicans more. But Obama and Democrats now have landed on a fundamental human truth: There’s nothing like a common enemy to bring everyone on your side together. And there’s nothing like whipping them up to get them all behind you in the fight.

Story Continued Below

And so he synchronized his base play Wednesday: nominating liberal favorite Janet Yellen as the new Federal Reserve chairwoman and putting the House Democrats first on the invitation list to meet with him at the White House.

( PHOTOS: Debt ceiling fight: 20 great quotes)

That’s been the approach the White House has taken all week. Obama hasn’t put Vice President Joe Biden in the room to strike another deal that many core Democrats will complain about. He hasn’t shied away from reaching out to his base, from noting that a reporter from The Huffington Post made an “important point” at his press conference Tuesday to sending his chief of staff that afternoon to meet with Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi but not Republicans.

Announcing a new Fed head during a financial crisis has its own benefits for a president who wants to look like the sober steward of the economy. Picking one who became a cause for many liberals — if only, for some, in contrast to the reviled Larry Summers — is another chance for the president to show he’s listening to and connecting with them, even if that meant effectively dictating the choice. That she would be the first woman on the job helps, too.

Most people, of course, don’t know or care who the Fed chief is — if they even know what the Federal Reserve is or does. But to core Democrats and especially those on the Hill, Obama’s choice matters, as does the deference of reaching out to them over the past few weeks.

( Also on POLITICO: Harry Reid won't rule out nuke option)

That probably won’t reset the relationship forever, but for now, Democrats are enjoying a new unity with the president.

“Oh, absolutely. Yeah,” said Michigan Sen. Debbie Stabenow. She added, “And by the way, the new nominee for Fed chair — everyone’s thrilled about [her], including me. It’s wonderful.”

Earlier in the day, Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) led a group of five of his Democratic colleagues in pointing out the shutdown’s impact on veterans. Between citing statistics and bemoaning the situation, all of them used words that have become very familiar from the president’s mouth: “hostage,” “lurching from crisis to crisis” and calling on Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) to hold a vote.

Democrats on the Hill haven’t changed their views or their approach to suit the president, Sanders said.

( WATCH: Obama comments on shutdown, blasts Republicans)

“Maybe,” Sanders said, “the president is more in sync with us.”

“I think there’s unity. I wouldn’t want to compare it to the past,” Maryland Sen. Ben Cardin said, a smile creeping across his face. “But there’s clearly unity now.”

Like the president’s refusal to bend to the House GOP demands to defund Obamacare, this is all less of a proactive plan out of the White House than Obama taking advantage of a situation that’s presented itself, allowing them to connect with the base in a way that’s usually possible only in the context of an election.

“Everyone who’s paying attention knows that a solution to this stalemate will require Democratic votes in the House,” said White House spokesman Josh Earnest. “That’s why the president is working closely and consulting frequently with Democrats to keep them unified throughout this process.”

Politically, things came together all at once in a way political strategists usually only dream about: a base priority kicking into action (Obamacare going live); the other side doing something deeply unpopular (House Republicans triggering a government shutdown); and the president, in a way that the base has constantly complained he doesn’t, holding firm.

( WATCH: Democrats vs. Republicans on shutdown)

The day of the shutdown deadline, the Democratic National Committee hit its single biggest online fundraising day since before the election, raising $850,000. That’s continued at such a brisk pace that only nine days in it’s already expecting October to be the best small donation fundraising month in years.

DNC communications director Mo Elleithee credits the president for leading “a level of engagement that we haven’t seen for a long time.”

The response among independents has only helped. With those numbers showing just as much unhappiness with the Republicans, moderate Democrats like Sens. Mark Pryor of Arkansas, Mary Landrieu of Louisiana and Kay Hagan of North Carolina — even though they’re up for reelection next year — haven’t had to bolt, prompting the inevitable problems of a party divided and forcing the president to tack to the middle. Democrats see the current crisis as driving a wedge between Republicans and the mainstream in a way that hasn’t happened since the fight over providing women’s contraception.