(Image: Tiziana Fabi/AFP/Getty)

Weak, noisy and incomplete: it’s easy to see why the genetic profiles constructed from tiny traces of crime scene DNA can fail to meet the high standards needed for criminal courts. But these low-template DNA (LTDNA) profiles could prove useful, thanks to new software.

Forensic scientists can now construct a partial DNA profile from just a few cells, says David Balding at University College London. However, natural contamination from DNA in the environment, together with the fact that it is impossible to build a complete genetic profile from so few cells, means that interpreting LTDNA evidence is challenging. Consequently, court cases where it plays a central role – such as the trial of Amanda Knox for the murder of Meredith Kercher – often become controversial.

That largely reflects a lack of proper statistical techniques to handle the data, Balding says. His software is a step towards improving that.

Advertisement

It compares a full DNA profile of a suspect with an incomplete DNA profile found at a crime scene. By incorporating factors such as the natural decay of a DNA sample, or the presence of DNA from another person entirely, the software can provide a probability score that a suspect was at the crime scene. Using the software on a sample from a bra clasp found near Kercher’s body suggests it is very unlikely that the item carries Knox’s DNA. Italy’s supreme court ruled in June that Knox and her then-boyfriend, Raffaele Sollecito, acquitted in 2011, should be retried for the murder.

Peter Gill, a forensic geneticist at the University of Oslo in Norway, says the new software is based on theories he developed a decade ago, which he regularly uses to help train police. But he adds that implementation of those theories in courts, particularly in the UK, is long overdue. “Current methods of LTDNA interpretation are ineffective,” he says.

Several groups are working on software to improve the handling of LTDNA, Gill says, but the exact methods used by most are protected for commercial reasons. Balding’s software is open source. “In order to gain court acceptance I argue that transparency of software is required and therefore the way forward is open source,” says Gill. “Balding’s software satisfies this criterion.”

The next step is to present the software’s results in an intuitive manner that courts can understand, says Balding.

Journal reference: PNAS, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1219739110