'Ready For Tie-Up If Mulayam's PM, Rahul Is Deputy,' Quips Akhilesh Yadav: Highlights

Share EMAIL PRINT Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister speaking at HT summit

New Delhi: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav addressed the 13th Hindustan Times Leadership Summit.



Here are the highlights Uttar Pradesh being the most populated states has taken path breaking decisions

I can say after four years, that many decisions have been taken which can be an example for the nation

It is true that Samajwadi Party is a little behind in marketing and branding

We have created a balance between farmers and urbanisation

The expressway from Delhi to Lucknow will be the biggest one - six lane expandable to eight lane

No canes were used. Farmers gave their land peacefully. It will be functional tomorrow

Lucknow Metro is being made at the fastest speed in the country

Uttar Pradesh is the largest milk producing state in the country. Cattle head has also gone up

45 lakh women are getting pension

This is the difference between Socialists. They are what they are. Who is not scolded by parents one shouldn't feel bad when a father complains

We are not fighting for rights. There is no fight between father and son for rights

10 lakh stolen from ATM, you will see our photos on news. 22 crores were stolen, did they show any photo of the Chief Minister

You have to see everything in totality

One thing should be cleared. If there is any communal politics, it will not benefit Socialists

It is easy to be communal but tough to be secular, if we have communal riots, who will gain

The worst thing is always shown about us

Mulayam Singh's birthday was not a controversy. Some people celebrate birthdays behind closed doors, we do it in the open with everyone

On Netaji's birthday, we didn't spend any money from the government

Drought - Yes we should be prepared, there is no drought right now. I decided and started preparing for it On Amar Singh There's no problem - Uncle (Azam Khan) and Netaji's (Mulayam Singh Yadav) relations have been the same as always

Our party was shamed during Badayun. The truth came. Did anyone say even once that they made a mistake On Azam Khan and Dadri Killing I said that we will not take the issue to the United Nations

Police was there on time, victims admitted in the hospital. Police will reach when they have information

Some wanted it to become a big issue. We took action, sent people to jail, slapped National Security Act

Achche Din, where did they go - Love Jihad

You are taking a selfie with everyone. We should forget about what people are eating and wearing

When we give laptop, they say it is a sop

According to population Uttar Pradesh is the biggest state in India. If we go into losses, how will we make roads, bridges

If we are building an expressway from Agra to Lucknow, we are spending Rs 14,000 crore

I have met PM Narendra Modi, have written to him for more funds for the state, stating that you (PM) came to Uttar Pradesh to become PM, you have to help

BJP creates divide, the kind of language used by their people On Rahul Gandhi Rahul Ji is an old friend

I will be with them if Mulayam Singh ji is PM and Rahul Gandhi is Deputy. I will say yes to the alliance right now On BSP chief Mayawati I call her Bua Ji because you call her Behen Ji. Bua prefers elephant made of stones

Those elephants are standing and those sitting are not standing

If you see the result properly, Samajwadi Party has won the most seats in panchayat elections

I will go to Noida in 2017 after winning

Amar Singh Personal relations never become bad. Politics is not about heart, it is about the mind and need

I am happy that Akhilesh has learnt the art of avoiding questions from a seasoned journalist like you. I give him my blessings Akhilesh Yadav resumes The work done in development is showing now

We are working on the issue of Law and Order. I am working on it

After Dialling 100, Police will reach in 10 minutes. Noida is such a big hub, perception will change with steps like these Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav addressed the 13th Hindustan Times Leadership Summit. NDTV Beeps - your daily newsletter