The Associated Press reported Monday that former Vice President Joe Biden (D) will attend a retreat of sorts with former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney, as well as Senators John McCain (R-AZ), and Lindsey Graham (R-SC), and Speaker of the House Paul Ryan (R-WI).

Romney will interview Biden Friday evening at the invite-only weekend retreat in Deer Valley, Utah, a Biden spokesman and participants with knowledge of the summit’s schedule told the news wire. ... Biden "is attending because he believes in bipartisanship and the importance of keeping good lines of communication open across the aisle," spokeswoman Kate Bedingfield told the AP.

This is where we are in June of 2017; divided into four large tribes. Farthest to the right, you have the Trumpain populists; farthest to the left, you have the Sanders populists. Center right are the constitutional conservatives; center left are the progressives. However, smack dab in the middle are establishment Republicans like Mitt Romney and Paul Ryan, and establishment Democrats like Joe Biden and Senator Joe Manchin (D-WV). These politicians are increasingly finding themselves on the outside looking in; a people without a group identity.

This meeting between Romney and Biden signals an attempt to create a fifth political lane, one in which establishment Republicans and Democrats coalesce with their counterparts on the other side of the aisle. This is likely a reaction to the divisiveness in today's political climate. Romney, Biden, and their ilk see both extremes — the Trump and Sanders tribalists — and they believe that a middle-ground coalition will appeal to independent voters.

It may appear as though Democrats and Republicans — even the most centrist among them — hold radically different positions, but the truth is, their goals are actually quite similar on a number of issues.

Republicans don't really want to defund Planned Parenthood; they no longer think of abortion as a critical issue. Democrats could be persuaded to moderate their more extreme abortion rhetoric so long as their sacred cow receives government funding.

Democrats want an open border, and so do Republicans. Rationales may be different, but their desired outcomes are the same. More illegal immigrants — for votes or for labor.

Both Democrats and Republicans want some form of government health care for all Americans.

Both Republicans and Democrats are Keynesian in their economic policies, willing to spend shocking amounts of taxpayer money to keep the economy moving, despite any predictions that such policies will bankrupt future generations.

A fifth lane would be comprised of seemingly moderate individuals who wouldn't lob personal insults at their opponents, and who wouldn't partake in more hardline positions. A sort of slow-motion socialism wearing the costume of milquetoast moderates. Such a group of people may be appealing to a certain segment of the voting population.

As the two main political parties continue to fracture in the wake of the 2016 election cycle, politicians may seize the opportunity to form a fifth lane in order to move the dial back to the middle, back to the zone where they all lived happy, comfortably combative lives.

Extremes require backbone and firm decision-making — something that makes most politicians in Washington, whether Democrat or Republican, uneasy. The question remains, in a day and age in which intensity dominates the political discussion, will these moderates sink their hooks into a large enough support base?

Anything is possible.