2-day trip included stay at Hyatt Regency Coconut Point Resort in Bonita Springs.

The Elliott Tower on the campus of Oakland University in Rochester Hills, Michigan, in 2014. (Photo: Associated Press)

Oakland University's top administrators and six members of the Board of Trustees took a two-day trip last week to Florida, where they held a private retreat to discuss plans for the university.

The cost of the retreat — held Feb. 3 and 4 at the Hyatt Regency Coconut Point Resort in Bonita Springs, where rooms go for $299 per night — isn't known. The university paid directly for airfare and hotel for seven administrators, three support staff and a consultant to attend. Board trustees will be able to submit expenses for reimbursement. The money to pay for the trip comes from the general fund, which is made up of revenue from tuition payments and state aid.

The board met socially with alumni from the area and then spent the day in the meetings.

The University of Michigan Board of Regents has held similar out-of-state retreats, in New York and Los Angeles in recent years. U-M's board retreat this year was held last month in Ann Arbor.

The Free Press has sued U-M over those meetings, alleging they violate the state Open Meetings law, which requires most government meetings to be open to the public. U-M has claimed the state constitution excludes it from the Open Meetings Act and allows it to decide which meetings are open to the public and which are not. A judge agreed with U-M initially, but the Free Press has appealed that ruling.

Attending the Oakland retreat were board Chairman Mark Schlussel, and trustees Michael Kramer, Richard Flynn, Melissa Stolicker, David Tull and Ronald Robinson. Board Vice Chairman Richard DeVore and Trustee Robert Schostak did not attend.

Administrators attending were President George Hynd, Provost James Lentini, Chief Operating Officer Scott Kunselman, Chief Financial Officer John Beaghan, Vice President Victor Zambardi, Vice President Glenn McIntosh and Associate Vice President Paul Schroeder, along with three support staff members. Consultant Scott Miller of Hanbury Evans also attended.

Buy Photo Oakland University President George Hynd in a 2014 photo. (Photo: Ryan Garza, Detroit Free Press)

At the retreat, Hynd talked about his five-year and 10-year vision plans for the university. The group also talked about risk management and strategy on enrollment and student life.

Miller reviewed concepts based on campus input and analysis including areas where new buildings could be constructed.

"The retreat provided uninterrupted time for trustees to develop a better perspective on complex topics," the university said in a statement e-mailed to the Free Press

The meeting with the alumni was also valuable, the university said.

"There are over 25,000 alumni who live outside of Michigan; 2,170 of whom live in Florida. There are many retired faculty, staff and donors who are also in Florida. Having activities in the area provides opportunities for various constituencies to interact and learn about university points of pride.

"These informal conversations provide insights into how those who are out-of-state view OU from a distance and how they may engage and support the exciting new direction that has been charted."

Oakland Junior Mark Howell, 21, of Northville, said he's split about the trip.

"I don't have a problem if they are out meeting alumni, especially if they raise money for the school," he said, "but if they were talking about the future of the university, I think students and faculty should have a chance to at least hear those discussions."

Contact David Jesse: 313-222-8851, djesse@freepress.com or on Twitter @reporterdavidj

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1TdLYI6