Eric Jamison/Associated Press

Dreams are relative.

What you want to accomplish in life probably isn't what I want to accomplish in life, and even among individuals following the same career path, what works for John Doe doesn't necessarily work for Steve Smith.

Example: Tim Hague.

If you followed the UFC at its height in mid- to late 2009, you probably remember him. He was that giant Canadian heavyweight with the sweet sideburns who submitted Pat Barry in one minute and 42 seconds after getting blasted for roughly 1:41 prior.

He also got knocked out by Todd Duffee in seven seconds at UFC 102.

Hague fought five times for the UFC, and the win against Barry in his UFC debut turned out to be his last. He didn't stick around.

This is where we learn our lesson: Not everyone is in the sport for the same reasons.

"I made the decision to stay at home and train and raise my son when I was fighting in the UFC," Hague said. "I think if I would have gone away to a more professional camp with heavyweights to train with every day, I probably would have had a lot more staying power with the UFC, but I'm happy with the decision I made to be close to my son."

In a sport where seemingly everyone spends 27 hours every day lifting, sparring, rolling and studying, Hague serves as a reminder that it just doesn't have to be that way. We make our choices, and we chase our own dreams.

But don't mistake his words and his mentality for an excuse. Hague legitimately wanted to be an MMA superstar. He chased after what he felt he wanted, what he needed. After graduating from college, Hague taught kindergarten before deciding his true calling was inside the cage.

He walked along a stable career path, and he veered into the brush.

"Not too many people, I don't think, follow their heart like that," Hague said.

Presently, Hague is in the midst of a particularly strong run. The 31-year-old has won three straight—all via knockout—two of which came under the World Series of Fighting (WSOF) banner. He's fighting as well as he has in years—and maybe ever—and he's revamped his diet and honed his training regimen to make a late career push.

He's fighting Friday, March 27, in the main event at Unified MMA 22 in a heavyweight title fight against undefeated rising star Tanner Boser, an event that will stream live online.

Hague is far removed from the bright lights of the Octagon, but his goal remains the same.

It's not the gold. Remember, this is Hague we're talking about.

"What I want to do from now on in life, what's going to make me the happiest, is to build something of value to leave behind for my son when I go," Hague said. "I don't think fighting is going to give me that, maybe not competing, but if I'm able to start a school or a gym or something like that, I think I'd be following my heart."

By his admission, this may take "three, four or five" more fights. That part isn't significant. What matters is that he gets there, and he's more driven than ever to establish that future for his six-year-old muse, Brady.

"I'll do whatever it takes to accomplish my goal and nothing will stop me," Hague said. "As soon as I have the money to sustain a living off coaching or something like that, then that's what I'll do. I've put myself through wars. Thirty fights is not a joke. If I have to do a few more, make it 35, I will, but I'd like to use the knowledge I've gained over the last eight years and put it to teaching."

The championship is not be the ultimate goal for The Thrashing Machine, but it does matter. For any fighter putting himself "through wars," the chance to capture gold matters, and Hague is doing his part to make sure his hand is raised when the cage announcer renders the decision.

"The only thing I've been concentrating on is just this fight. I'm actually somewhat obsessive about it," Hague said. "I remember his [Boser's] fight against Jordan Tracey almost like photographic memory...I'm going to capitalize on his movement. When he makes a move I can capitalize on, it's going to be quick and vicious."

Hague is motivated to win. While it may not be his endgame, Hague wants that belt, and he wants to carry it to Brady on Saturday morning to show him what dad was up to Friday night.

"It would be a very special moment," Hague said. "Returning a champion to my son after I told him I wanted to become one would be special for all of us."

Should he get past Boser and bring home the Unified MMA strap, Hague knows exactly the kind of celebration he wants to have. The post-fight party isn't at Club XYZ.

It's at Grandpa's farm, and Brady's attendance is mandatory.

"I have plans to take him to the farm for a few days, just to relax up there," Hague said. "I'll take him trapping with Grandpa. My grandpa still runs a trapline, and we enjoy that, so I'm going to do that and just spend some quality time with him. That's what makes me really happy."