closenforget

What's New 0.9.1 version is compatible with Firefox 3.6

0.9.0 version is faster and smarter (shortcut <Alt>+W and close all tabs at once)

and close all tabs at once) 0.8.1 & 0.8.2 bugs fixes

0.8 contains chinese version and some bugs fixes

0.7 version is compatible with Firefox 3.5 and adds a new contextual button

0.6.6 adds japanese and some bugs fixes

0.6.2 version contains even more options to control your privacy, adds an entry in context menu and fix [bug 20605]

0.5 becomes publicly available on addons.mozilla.org

0.5 version contains more options to control your privacy

0.4 version is more stable

0.3 version is the first public version Other Stuff Submit features requests here

This Firefox add-on is very simple and do just one thing : it closes the current tab and "forget" about the visit. For that, it suppress the related cookies and, if configured so, the whole domain's pages from the browser's history.

Close'n Forget is available in 6 languages : [fr], [en], [es], [ja], [cn] and [de]

Use it !

Once you have the button available in your prefered place (see the installation guide), and when you want to leave a website without keeping the cookies it has left in your browser, you just have to click on this new button.



Note that the button's background turns brown when the mouse pointer is near or above the button. So then you are sure to not confuse it with the regular Firefox's Close Tab Button.

When pressed, the button closes the active tab and remove all cookies from the internet domain of the closed page. The number of deleted cookies is briefly displayed in the status bar :



Pretty usefull, no ?

Use it even more !

With Close'n Forget, you can do even more !

Thanks to a few simple options, you can control how your privacy is protected when you close a tab with Close'n Forget. To do that, simply go to the extension manager and open the Close'n Forget options dialog

You can then activate or not the cookie removal, and you can extend it to all subdomains of the current page's domain. For example, if the page currently loaded in the tab is http://www.foo.com/bar.html , you can remove cookies for www.foo.com and for .foo.com , but also for media.foo.com , ad.foo.com , tracker.foo.com and so on !

You can also remove the visited site (and/or all pages viewed in the tab to be closed) from the browser's history.

Then check the first box, and confirm, like that :



The next time you will close a tab with the Close'n Forget button, not only you will delete all related cookies, but also remove any reference to the current site from the browser's history.

Like that :

Before After

Enjoy !