IT used to be said that the Australian economy rode on the sheep's back. But even at the start of the 20th century, farmers depended on telegraph lines to get the best possible price from global demand for wool and mutton. Those farmers probably would have been surprised to be told they were part of their age's information revolution. But they knew a useful technology when they saw one.

Telegraph lines made it possible to run the trains according to the timetables that took their goods to the coast and meant the ships arriving from Europe would otherwise have arrived with too much or too little capacity in their hulls. Global communication, however rudimentary, connected the commodity trader in London to the ship's captain to the hand in the outback. They all benefited.

We're now seeing the internet filling the same kind of role -- its benefits aren't limited to the people who operate it. Instead, like steam power, like electricity, it shifts every industry into a different gear. Measuring that shift, however, is hard. The internet's too new for statistics agencies to track the contribution of my industry as they do for others. And all too often people in my line of work cite bizarre or self-serving statistics that are impressively large but hard to compare with what happens in other industries.

Read Next

So what's needed is a figure that everyone agrees on as a benchmark for communities, governments and businesses to measure the internet by. Gross domestic product, conceived during World War II, provides that measure. It is harsh, but it doesn't leave much room for disagreement. It doesn't care about the things the internet advocates, such as freedom of information, time efficiency, or new models of sharing -- all of which may create economic value, but are difficult to measure. In contrast, GDP simply wants to know, in the end, how much money people, businesses and the government spent on the internet.

Having commissioned economists to measure the internet's contribution to GDP in Hong Kong and Europe, we asked Deloitte Access Economics to take the economic pulse of Australia's internet. Before the results came in, I wasn't sure where they would land. Australia has a growing tech sector and a remarkably rapid embrace of smartphones compared with other countries. But it lacks access to the cheap, fast internet you find in Britain and across northern Europe, where the internet contributes about 6 per cent to 7 per cent of GDP. Countries such as Italy and Spain, which, like Australia, have broadband penetration rates below the OECD average, have an internet economy at about 1 per cent to 2 per cent of GDP. It turns out the internet contributed $50 billion to the Australian economy last year, or 3.6 per cent of GDP. That's about the same level as the internet contributes to France's economy, even though France's internet penetration is higher. More surprisingly, it matches the contribution from iron ore exports.

How did the internet grow to be as large as our main commodity export? The answer lies in using a different definition of what counts as an internet business from the one we've been using for 15 years. Forget Google or Facebook. The report basically abolishes the idea of an internet business in this day and age being somehow special and distinct. Every business in Australia is an internet business.

That's not to say that this particular transformation has been easy for every business. No technological change comes for free. The important thing is for companies to understand that the change has occurred. Like it or not, consumers are building their lives around the internet. And even the most traditional business uses the internet to some extent -- even if it's just e-banking, email and speedier tax filing.

The next step occurs when traditional businesses realise how much they have to gain by embracing the internet rather than assuming it's something that only tech companies can exploit. The report highlights how Aussie Farmers Direct now generates more than $100 million a year by selling fresh food online. Or take AuctionsPlus, which sold 2.2 million sheep via an online auction process to farmers both locally and overseas last year.

What's true of those companies is true across the economy. A business survey Deloitte conducted as part of the report shows Australia's main industries rewiring themselves around the internet. The primary businesses reported some of the greatest benefits from using the internet. Even fishing can get a boost from the internet, as Shoal Bay Sportfishing of Howard Springs, NT, discovered when it set up a web site recently. Owner Bob Morris now gets 50 per cent of his bookings via the web site.

It's also important to note the value to Australian households of the shift in the economy from offline to on. The GDP figures show how much Australians pay for the internet, but not necessarily the benefits they get from it. We all know the internet saves us time. But how much is that time worth? Deloitte reckons it's worth $7bn a year to us. Similarly, it's obvious the internet brings greater variety of goods to our doors. But what is that variety worth? It's worth $16bn a year.

Adding up all these kinds of benefits (greater convenience and recreation among them), Deloitte estimates households are getting $53bn in value from the internet. We often hear of the disruption the internet causes and less about these kinds of benefits -- our hope is that more efforts like Deloitte's research will introduce some balance into that debate.

So households and businesses are seeing a big return on their investments on the internet, although the investment levels have yet to reach the levels you've seen in other economies. The amount of activity on Australia's internet has doubled over the past four years but, when you look at how the same process has played out overseas, it's still early days.

With that much room to expand, the value of the internet's contribution is set to grow at about 7 per cent a year over the next five years, double the rate economists have pegged for the Australian economy as a whole. That's a boom that every company is enjoying because every business is contributing to it. Like the farm hand at the turn of the last century, they might not realise that they're a part of it. When they do -- and they are -- that's when the real transformation will occur.

Nick Leeder is the managing director of Google Australia.

Read Next