Jose Mourinho is set to return to Chelsea

The Portuguese said goodbye to the Bernabeu on Saturday night with a 4-2 victory over Osasuna and speculation has been mounting for some time that he will return to Stamford Bridge.

Mourinho, 50, enjoyed four stellar years with the Blues between 2004 and 2007 - winning two Premier League titles, an FA Cup, two League Cups and an FA Community Shield.

He went on to clinch the Champions League with Internazionale in 2010 and won the hearts of Real fans by wresting the La Liga title from arch-rivals Barcelona in 2012 before falling from grace this term and coming to a mutual agreement to terminate his contract.

Ricardo Carvalho, who was a mainstay of Chelsea's defence under Mourinho and followed his compatriot to Real, believes that 'The Special One' returning to fill the Blues' vacancy left by the departing Rafa Benitez is a shrewd move for all concerned.

Carvalho said: "They are doing well but it is important to improve. It's a special club for me. I was so happy there and I wish they will win titles. They won the UEFA Cup (this season) but the Premier League is important.

"In two or three years I'm sure, but also in his first year he can win again. In 2004 when we went there, he won in his first year and he can do the same."

Bayern Munich winger Arjen Robben has also backed Mourinho to bring silverware back to Chelsea.

Robben won two league titles at Chelsea and the Dutchman thinks that Mourinho can replicate that success should he go back.

"It's a big move for Chelsea with Jose coming back but I know it is one the fans will welcome," he told The Sunday People.

"He had very successful years at Chelsea and he can have them again.

"The thing about Jose is that he will win at any cost; he doesn't care how, he just wants to win.

"I've not always been supportive of the style of football he plays, but he is a winner who has achieved great success. I am sure that with some big signings from the owner that Jose and Chelsea can rule England again."

His former team-mate Frank Lampard sealed a new contract at Chelsea last month and Robben believes it could be down to Mourinho's potential homecoming.

"It is no surprise to me that Frank is now staying. It cannot be for football reasons that he was going because he is still one of the best. It must have been a personal thing with the old coach," he said.

"As soon as it became clear Jose would return, there was never any chance Frank would go because there is such respect and a friendship between the two of them.

"He sent me a text after we won the final, that is the sort of classy guy Frank is."