GETTY The pilots were not able to do anything as the plane's vital systems stopped working

Vital systems, including the reporting systems, went down on the Malaysia Airlines plane, the Australian Transport Bureau said in a shocking new report. It then flew for hours until the aircraft ran out of fuel and eventually crashed into the ocean. Pilots struggled in vain to save the desperate situation, flying in the face of previous claims alleging they may have gone rogue. The scenario put forward in the report would involve the plane's last course of action as changing direction but this may be explained by the pilots attempting to divert back to land.

GETTY People search for MH370 debris on Reunion Island

As power and contact was lost the theory sees the plane continue along its flight path until fuel run out, when it crashed into the ocean. Flight MH370 from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing disappeared on March 8 last year. The latest report by investigators shows the flight was in the air for seven hours and 38 minutes rather than the scheduled time of five and a half hours. The journey saw the plane divert over the southern Indian Ocean.

Good night. Malaysian three seven zero Captain of MH370

When pilots last made contact with air traffic control in Kuala Lumpur the jet was heading over the South China Sea. The captain said: "Good night. Malaysian three seven zero." Minutes later the jet disappeared from air traffic radar but was discovered by military satellites going back to Malaysia. It is believed the power loss occurred just after this last contact, when the transponder failed. This was shown by the Satellite Data Unit onboard the jet trying to reconnect by rebooting an hour and a half after the plane took off.

Top 10 Conspiracy Theories Wed, March 8, 2017 From mind control, to the missing Malaysian airways flight MH370 Play slideshow AFP/Getty Images 1 of 10 In 2011, Osama Bin Laden was killed by US Navy Seals and buried at sea, but now conspiracy theorists claim that it was all a lie and he is still alive

GETTY Speculation has continued over the final resting place of MH370 since it disappeared in March 2014

The Boeing 777 aircraft, which had 239 people onboard, was still able to transmit seven "handshakes" to a satellite which were used to map its route to the Indian Ocean. This was detected by London-based satellite operator Inmarsat and has seen months of scouring the seabed of the ocean by the Australian-led search team. Investigators do not explain what caused the power failure, merely saying it was due to technical issues.

GETTY Australia's Warren Truss insists the plane will be found