Get the biggest Liverpool FC stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Michael Beale felt some big decisions went against his Liverpool Under-21s team as he reflected on a narrow 3-2 defeat to Manchester United on Monday night.

Liverpool goals from Jerome Sinclair (83) and substitute Madger Gomes (85) had wiped out a first-half effort from Marouane Fellaini and a second-half tap in from Nick Powell before Sean Goss’s effort won it for United in the last minute.

But Liverpool appeared to have a strong first-half penalty claim against Felliani when he blocked Harry Wilson’s free-kick with his elbow while Madger Gomes’ second-half strike from the edge of the box was incorrectly ruled out for offside.

United defender Guillermo Varela also looked lucky to escape with just a yellow as he clipped Jerome Sinclair as he moved in on goal.

Beale felt his team deserved better and also revealed that he had been asked to play Jose Enrique at centre-half where he played all 90 minutes, though not without alarm.

The Reds boss told the ECHO: “I thought the game was rough on us, I thought even the first half was even, we gave away a real sloppy goal. Both teams huffed and puffed without showing any quality.

“I said to them at half-time ‘there’s not much in it’. But we started the second half really slowly, it started from the centre and then we got bogged down in our own half.

“But once we got over that, we did all right and there were some big moments in the game that didn’t go our way.

“I’m told Fellaini first half with Harry Wilson’s free-kick is handball, Madger Gomes’ goal is not offside which is tough for us to take and then when Jerome (Sinclair) goes through and the lad pulls him down is a big moment.”

After the Reds fought back to 2-2 late on, striker Sinclair had a great chance on his left foot inside the box but decided to cut in on his right and the chance was lost.

It was a vital moment, felt the Reds’ manager.

“The biggest moment in the whole game was 2-2, Jerome Sinclair to the left of the box, if he takes the shot on,” said Beale.

“That’s a learning curve for him and he’s been working a lot on that. We actually conceded from the same move – I’m really disappointed with all three goals.

“It’s frustrating because we had such a good result (4-3 win) away at Sunderland who had five first-teamers out. Without them, that Sunderland went and beat Chelsea 3-1 away today.”

The return of Jordan Rossiter was one of the keys on the night for Liverpool and he enjoyed a tidy 62 minutes before being withdrawn.

Beale said: “The big positive was Jordan Rossiter, an hour was the plan, and 45 minutes for Brad Smith as well is fantastic.

“He’s looking to push on with his fitness now, spending every day at Melwood which is great for him.”

The decision to play Jose Enrique at centre-back – where he at times struggled – came from the club.

“Obviously Jose was playing his first 90 in a long time,” said Beale. “It’s something the club have been looking at in training. I was just asked to play him at centre-half, so no problems, Jose’s been working there in training fine.

“I think 90 minutes for Jose is really important mentally, because it’s been a long time and I suppose at centre half there’s less running which will guarantee him the 90.”

Beale added: “I thought there were good performances tonight and the game was harsh on us but we can’t keep saying that and losing to our bitter rivals.

“Powell and Fellaini make a big difference physically. I mean Fellaini was a mainstay in the first team earlier in the season, he’s effective and he’s hard to handle but what a learning experience for our boys.

“At 2-2 after being 2-0 down, they’re young and they want to go and win. I wanted them to go and win so no problem with that but looking ahead if that’s the first team you’d probably say why wouldn’t you be happy with the 2-2?”

Liverpool play Everton next in the mini-derby on Sunday and will hope to move off the bottom of the U21s league table with a win over their local rivals.