German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s favor with the people has fallen so low that she’s now faced with trying to dodge tomatoes that are hurled her way when she speaks in public.

Such was the scenario at a recent gathering in the southern college town of Heidelberg.

As Deutsche Presse Agentur reported, Merkel faced airborn tomatoes tossed her way, while giving a speech on stage.

The Daily Caller News Foundation has more:

Police said two tomatoes were thrown during different times of Merkel’s speech. One tomato hit the chancellor’s left hip. A representative for Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU) was also hit. DPA reports that Merkel kept the same outfit on for a television appearance hours later. Some 3,000 people showed up to the rally. The crowd was primarily made up of Merkel supporters and CDU, but some attendees chanted “hypocrite” and “liar” throughout her speech. “If we made a mistake, then it wasn’t in taking in people, but rather that we didn’t pay attention to the fact that people in Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Syria didn’t have enough to eat, weren’t getting an education and put themselves into the hands of people smugglers,” Merkel said in defense of her decision to open doors to migrants in 2015. Merkel has been heckled during several campaign events as she tries to secure a fourth term in office in the Sept. 24 election. Supporters of the populist Alternative for Germany party (AfD) have shown up to protest Merkel’s immigration policy, which Merkel has called a strength of Germany’s democracy. “Sometimes listening a bit isn’t a bad thing,” she said after a rally in August, according to Reuters.

The Truth Must be Told Your contribution supports independent journalism Please take a moment to consider this. Now, more than ever, people are reading Geller Report for news they won't get anywhere else. But advertising revenues have all but disappeared. Google Adsense is the online advertising monopoly and they have banned us. Social media giants like Facebook and Twitter have blocked and shadow-banned our accounts. But we won't put up a paywall. Because never has the free world needed independent journalism more. Everyone who reads our reporting knows the Geller Report covers the news the media won't. We cannot do our ground-breaking report without your support. We must continue to report on the global jihad and the left's war on freedom. Our readers’ contributions make that possible. Geller Report's independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our work is critical in the fight for freedom and because it is your fight, too. Please contribute to our ground-breaking work here.

Make a monthly commitment to support The Geller Report – choose the option that suits you best. Contribute Monthly - Choose One Subscriber : $18.00 USD - monthly Contributor : $36.00 USD - monthly Patron : $50.00 USD - monthly Silver member : $100.00 USD - monthly Gold member : $250.00 USD - monthly Platinum member : $500.00 USD - monthly