Mountain Stage announces April 3 show in Lexington, KY

Charleston, WV – Mountain Stage with Larry Groce, the long-running live-performance radio program based in Charleston, WV, is pleased to announce it will record episode #866 before a live audience in Lexington, Kentucky, on April 3, 2016. This will mark the first time Mountain Stage has ever recorded its live performance radio program in Lexington.

"It's always a pleasure to take the show to a new place, but it's particularly exciting to be going to Lexington,” says Mountain Stage host and co-founder Larry Groce. “It's a lovely city in a beautiful part of the country, and WUKY is a great music station, so we expect its listeners to be enthusiastic. We'll be working closely with WUKY to put together a show that aims to please them as well as our national radio audience.”

WUKY, Lexington’s flagship NPR station, will present the April 3 Mountain Stage event. The listener-supported radio station has a close relationship with NPR programs, having been one of the first stations to broadcast NPR’s All Things Considered when it debuted in 1971. Mountain Stage can be heard weekly every Sunday at 3pm.

“From the first time I saw Mountain Stage live in Morgantown WV, I knew this was a radio show Lexington would love,” says WUKY General Manager Tom Godell. “The caliber of the performers they attract week after week is simply amazing. We quickly added the show to WUKY’s broadcast schedule & started lobbying them to bring Mountain Stage to the Singletary Center. The fact that they’re coming to Lexington during our 75th anniversary year makes this event even more exciting for us.”

Guest artists for the April 3 show are as follows:

Robbie Fulks

Over the Rhine.

Steve Forbert

Sarah Jarosz

Black Lillies

Tickets for the show are available now through the Singletary Center for the Arts, 859-257-4929 or click here.

The two-plus hour show will be recorded for distribution to 155 NPR stations nationwide this summer.

BUY TICKETS NOW

Larry Groce performing Junk Food Junkie on Mountain Stage in the 80s!