Automatically Generated Transcript (may not be 100% accurate)

And live at Maryville baseball -- Tim -- alongside Brewers now right fielder Ryan -- Ryan -- do whatever thing healthy and the thanks for the time. You're welcome thanks for having me feel pretty -- everything is wonderful program and start -- and -- us. There's nothing I can ask you that hasn't been in the courtroom but that -- asked and answered. So why would I even try I figure we do some different socks baseball sounds good to me thanks Coca hard. The switch to right field I do think Ryan that someone commendable for you. Because you know how this works he -- kind of put your foot down a little bit said -- I'm comfortable. You know you see my numbers -- comfortable but your thoughts -- moving to right field. -- I'm an employee -- Off the Brewers and I'm always a little play wherever they wanted to play aside from third base he tried that didn't work out so well. Myself like -- really good shortstop anyone they -- good chance to get back short. But other than that -- play -- serious I really I really can't play shortstop candidates. But you know I think with the move to right field -- benefits our team makes us a little better at something that mall for. I don't expect it to be easy -- feels pretty foreign to me but hopefully over the next few weeks are you more more comfortable. Yeah I know the sight lines probably going to be a little bit different for you Miller Park have you heard if they're more difficult over there. I know right showed at Miller Park should be significantly easier than I feel -- so we have death. Panels with the sun shining through in some different challenges so. I don't anticipate right field being more challenging son wiser panels -- with the lights in left field but definitely got drastically different ones. Some things a little concerning to me and you know covering your career and having done this nine years in the post and shows little concerning. You haven't really played since the lines so is the -- As is that sort of chronic or what's going on there I don't know it's a lot better than -- -- so so far so good at seven about seven on base it's so there's articles OK if I keep doing -- I think they'll be. Moment I mean doesn't mean it's been. A long time will it. Ever kind of a 100% go away I hope so when I came here to see the -- specials -- first heard it said it was going to be a long time that's pretty significant when I was Dillon so. Hopefully it doesn't go away right now I guess that -- significantly better than anything where where it was -- yourself having that focus on this -- quack. Carlos Thomas only this morning. He claims it's the most talented that he's been on your thoughts Tom. I would agree with them I think you know not just that the guys that are projected to be in the starting lineup or on the original point five man roster I think we really have more depth than we've had in years past. You know an infield and the outfield certainly is starting rotation. As we've seen that this -- always seem to come down to starting pitching. And I think our 6789. Starters now or are real quality guys guys with them well above average stuff on you look at what's I was -- was able to do last chance you know nine or ten starts centenarian ones. On and you know unless somebody gets hurt his neck and certainly in our rotation so you know you need your depth I think nobody gets this season using just their five starters so we're excited about our depth certainly I really -- -- -- we feel good about our chances. Some of the casinos got some guys about seven he would have to -- maybe 79 wins. And it doesn't. Jive with what I'm thinking here we -- in terms of the talent. F fortunately for us now the pre season prognostications have anything -- at the end result so. You know I think obviously our hands for a really tough division three playoff teams last year. -- all three teams should be really good again this year and the Cubs are certainly headed in the right direction as well so. On the won't be easy and then I think biggest house in the stands I was staying healthy. If we're able to stay healthy I really do think you have a good chance playing meaningful games -- the stretch. Run the biggest news in camp is Hank. Your dog lover lines. Yeah I don't I don't have a dog -- -- myself because of our hectic schedule and move around quite -- -- -- -- has become quite the celebrity around himself. It unless I doubt that though is an every playoff team that's sort of that kind of hidden charming story lines seriously does and for that reason alone -- so I'm like in the story. Yeah I think I'm an Angels gone back to the rally monkey -- Cardinals of this world so maybe Hank -- we -- good -- on this and see what happens. Ryan thanks for the time and good luck you gotta thank you.