Democrats across the nation are continuing to be revealed as corrupt and vile criminals as the days of Trump’s Presidency continue on. Democratic donors and politicians have been accused of heinous crimes lately as key figures like Weinstein and Weiner move forward with accusations and sentences, respectively. Now a Democratic Board of Commission President in Pennsylvania has been arrested for 120 charges consisting of child pornography possession and distribution.

It was October 11, 2017 when police raided the home of Philip Ahr, the 66-year-old Democratic member of the Radnor Township Board of Commissions. There they arrested Ahr and charged him with a massive list of charges consisting largely of child pornography. The police then seized the hard drive of his home computer and laptop where the authorities found truly vile contents.

This man was elected by the people of his township to lead them and represent their interests in government but it seemed like his wealth and status was only a result of the child pornography ring that he appeared to be a part of. The police found hundreds of images and videos in his possession that made it clear that this man’s fantasies were sickening as the ages of children abused in the videos did not seem to matter.

Police found Ahr to be in possession of many images and videos that depicted horrendous acts with children as young as infants. One video that was described by the detectives in charge of the case involved a small girl between three and five years where she was performing oral sex on a much much older male. This kind of abuse is exactly what disgusting perverts like Ahr are after when they engage in online negotiations for pictures.

It went even further than just viewing disgusting and illegal images as it was revealed during the investigation of Ahr’s hard drives that he was engaged in operating in the underground trade of child pornography. These disgusting pedophiles communicate with one another over the internet to exchange videos and images for prices they are willing to share them for. This is a massive and lucrative underground industry that operates on global scales and earns scumbags a lot of money.

These types of organizations require certain, and more daring, individuals to actually take the photos and images because they are worth so much money. Sycophants can make a really quick and easy dollar by abusing a child quickly and sharing the images online for money. This is why the industry is so dangerous and hard to stop as the money involved is astronomical.

The investigation revealed that as far back as 2013, Ahr was engaging in chat rooms online where he was requesting and trading images and videos of children engaging in abusive and horrific acts. Many of the images included both males and females abusing the children as young as infants and some somehow managed to go farther according to investigators.

One video contained images of a child being sexually abused by an animal and being filmed by adults so they can make some money off of producing the child pornography.

People like Ahr operate on a different level than most Americans are used to because of his involvement in both politics and the underground world of pedophilia. In this day and age of technology, it does not seem likely that someone else did not know about the activities that Ahr and his online associates were up to. This man was a public servant and likely had political associates within the Democratic party that he used to help win his seat. It is incredibly sad to think that a simple hard drive search could have prevented this man from ever holding authority.

The days of Trump’s presidency are revealing the corruption levels that the DNC was operating on as their massive gambits are beginning to fail as the evidence surrounding their leaders history slowly comes to light. The group think narrative of the liberals in the United States are sure to change as liberals are confronted with evidence that they are in fact in the wrong and have been for a long time. It does not seem likely that those at the top with the most to lose will ever yield as their narrative crumbles around them.

Hopefully those on the left who have been told that Donald Trump is the ultimate evil really need to look within and see that he is the outsider fed up with the evil that has been taking place. Of course they are going to paint their destroyer as a bad guy but one just has to see who the Democrats truly are as they are criminals hunting for wealth and power.