A shrine has been placed in the parking lot of Greenbrier High School for Logan Stephenson, who died Thursday, Jan. 21, after possibly drinking racing fuel mixed with soda. A vigil was held for the teen last week, according to Greenbrier police. (Photo: Nicole Young / Robertson County Times)

A second Greenbrier teen has died and two more received medial treatment after officials said they drank a mixture of Mountain Dew and racing fuel last week.

On Thursday, Jan. 21, authorities were called to the Franklin Farms home of 16-year-old Logan Stephenson, who was found dead in his bed.

Within minutes, they were called to a second home, on Cemetery Road, because the boy’s best friend had begun having seizures, Greenbrier Police Chief K.D. Smith said in an earlier interview with The Times.

Authorities have not released the identity of the second teen, but Smith confirmed Tuesday that the medical examiner’s office had notified his department of the second teen’s death that morning. The Robertson County Sheriff's Office also released a statement Tuesday, confirming the second teen's death.

Spokesman Ryan Martin said the boy died Monday afternoon, and the Robertson County Sheriff’s Office was notified later that same day.

“We ask that everyone continue to pray for both of these families as they go through this tragic time,” Sheriff Bill Holt said in the department’s Tuesday release.

Since Stephenson’s death, two other teens have come forward, claiming they had drunk a similar substance, Smith said.

Four cases from Robertson County have been recorded with the Tennessee Poison Center, according to medical director Dr. Donna Seger.

Two of the teenagers were treated and released from two different emergency departments, Seger said.

Both teens said they had consumed a mixture of Mountain Dew and racing fuel, she said.

The investigation into the deaths of Stephenson and his best friend are ongoing. Police have not confirmed at this time whether the boys had actually consumed the substance because they are waiting for autopsy reports from the medical examiner's office that will determine cause of death, Smith said.

Meanwhile, investigators are urging community members to stop posting rumors about the case on social media sites, according to the release from the Robertson County Sheriff's Office.

The rumors "are deeply disturbing and harmful to the families that are already going through a tragic time of loss," the release said.

Robertson County Schools have been closed since before Stephenson's death because of inclement weather, but Schools Director Mike Davis said Tuesday that the system was planning to have extra counselors at Greenbrier High School when the students resume classes.

“Our heartfelt sympathies go out to the parents and family members of these young men,” Davis said. “I think we will make the special effort to inform students of the dangers related to the deaths of these boys. We need to be reminding kids to make good choices.”

Funeral services were held Tuesday for Stephenson, according to his obituary.

Logan was born May 25, 1999 in Hermitage, Tenn. to Wayne Stephenson, Jr. and Beth Daniel. He was a student at Greenbrier High School.

In addition to his parents, Logan is survived by his stepmother, Mickie Stephenson; stepfather, Kevin Daniel; grandparents, Wayne A. (Shirley) Stephenson, Sr., John (Sharon) Shane; brothers, Luke Daniel, Trevor Boles; sisters, McKenzie Stephenson, Lindsey Mays, Riley Daniel and Audrey Boles, his obituary said.

Logan Stephenson (Photo: Submitted photo)

The Stephenson family is collecting funds in Logan's memory.

“The family will be meeting with the school to discuss how to disburse these funds,” the obituary reads. “Their desire is that it will be used to educate children of the many dangers which they face which parents are not aware of and therefore not able to warn them.”

Austin & Bell Funeral Home is in charge of the arrangements.

Reporter Cheri Reeves contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RL6cIO