Welcome to Coober Pedy. Flickr/wbayercom When one first walks into the small Australian town of Coober Pedy, it does not look like a place that would be conducive to human life. The arid scenery resembles an otherworldly landscape, and due to the extreme temperatures, neither flora nor fauna flourish here.

Coober Pedy is an outback mining town. Australia supplies 95 percent of the world's opal supply, with most coming from Coober Pedy. Ian Waldie/Getty Images

One has to look eight to 22 feet below the ground in order to find the real gem of Coober Pedy, and that's not just the opal mines that brought humans to this desolate desert in the first place. All you can see of these homes are the chimneys. Flickr/nicholasjones Here's where you can go inside. Reuters The residents of Coober Pedy have built their own bustling underground town, complete with two churches, a bar and 1500 family-sized homes with above-ground entrances.

In 1915, miners began to convert the old mines into homes in order to avoid the terrible heat of the Australian Outback. Since then, Coober Pedy has started to rely as much on tourism as on opal mining for their main source of income. Residents have even added hotels, inns and museums to accommodate the influx of curious visitors.

A chandelier hangs from a stone ceiling in one of the town's underground buildings. Flickr/paleontour

This bar looks pretty normal. The only thing that makes it different from any other is that it's completely underground. Flickr/philliecasablanca

There's no natural light in the lobby of this hotel. Reuters/Dave Pratt Rooms in the hotel look creepy. Flickr/brettinoz30

The name of the town derives from the Aborigine word kupa piti, which means "white man's hole". The natives gave the miners this name when they discovered their dugouts. Coober Pedy's current population of 3,500 people still live in dugouts, with all the amenities of a home above ground: walk-in closets, modern kitchens and televisions, etc. This is the Underground Serbian Orthodox Church in Coober Pedy. Quinn Rooney/Getty Images

Here's their underground book store. Flickr/duremi

These homes are more than a hole in the ground. One contains an underground swimming pool, and some residents even maintain sand gardens on the surface. Not to mention residents take full advantage of the rosy sandstone walls, which are smoothed and sealed to control dust.

Of course, residents do emerge from their underground habitat to spend some time out in the real world. Coober Pedy is home to the world's hottest golf course. A local is raking out the green of the Coober Pedy Golf Course. Getty Images But it's not very green at all. Ian Waldie/Getty Images Like most things about the town, it is an atypical course comprised of a large sand trap rather than grass and pools of water. Golf lovers still find a way to play the game by using glow-in-the-dark balls and dragging around a piece of turf where they can tee off.

Annual events include the Opal Festival and the Coober Pedy Races. The Festival celebrates the end of a long, hot summer with raffles, parades and other outdoor activities that residents can compete in every year. The race meeting has been a tradition since 1969, with the intent of bringing people together from the town and a nearby station. Visitors walk across the town's eerie surroundings. Flickr/graeme

Almost all of the dwellings in Coober Pedy look like dugouts. Flickr/duremi The town's unique characteristics have held enormous appeal for filmmakers.

The barren landscape surrounding the outback opal mining town of Coober Pedy. Reuters

It has served as a number of different settings - including the Martian landscape it resembles - in movies like "Fire in the Stone", "Pitch Black", Val Kilmer's "Red Planet" and even an episode of Amazing Race.