Readers react to the ‘unmasking’ of Trump associates.

Former National Security Adviser Susan Rice. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

Former national security adviser Susan Rice said Tuesday that she did not seek to “unmask” the names of Trump associates for political purposes. Facebook comments are edited for clarity and grammar:

No political motivation? There was nothing but political motivations. There was no security issue, so why was it done? This is beyond even Watergate. At least President Nixon hired people for his spying. President Obama used tax-paid resources for his.

— Kyle Crawford

If President Trump’s associates were colluding with known enemies, I sure want to know their names, their family’s names, how much money they have and where that money came from. Why would you not want to know?

— Stacie Lynam

It’s time for Democrats to stop with their lying. Just listening to Susan Rice was a seminar in how to lie and appear to be genuinely honest. Sorry, Rice, that was a bit too transparent.

— Larry Cohen

Why is it that people don’t want to know what may actually be happening in this administration? If there’s corruption and collusion going on, doesn’t it behoove us all to know?

— Stephanie S. Mullen Fudge

If anyone in the Trump administration was unmasked it was because they had contact with the Russians, and may have been coordinating the hacking of America via the Democratic National Committee to assist with Trump’s election as president. All the information was presumably gathered legally. Hopefully the truth will come out and Trump will be impeached and jailed!

— Richard S. Copeland

So they went through the motions to request a detailed report and circulate it for no reason? What other purpose could there be than to share intel on Trump?

— Art DeMartini

Obama didn’t spy on Trump. It’s likely that he spied on Russian officials and because Trump tends to recruit people with ties to Russia, they got caught up in those operations.

— Chris Monti

We asked our followers their thoughts on Susan Rice saying there was no political motivation in “unmasking” Trump associates. Tweets are edited for clarity and grammar:

Rice was in President Obama’s inner circle. She had no reason, except political, to request unmasking.

— @OneAmerican7

President Trump has the same playbook from 1984, and he’s using the same lines he used against Hillary Clinton. What a joke! Keep your eyes on Russia.

— @DriskillClaudia

Yeah right, those liberals were spying on Trump and now they’re trying to justify it. No one is buying what they’re selling.

— @frethinker313

Pretty simple, Rice’s lying.

— @BLayton33

It sounds like an admission that Rice did in fact unmask Trump team members!

— @ccigroups

For more, follow @USATOpinion and #tellusatoday.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2oKfQQM