Recently, I wrote an e-mail to my Congressman, Rep. James Lankford, suggesting that impeachment proceedings against President Obama be considered. I feel that impeachment is justifiable because of his flagrant violations of the US Constitution. I feel that violations against the US Constitution criminal acts because this document is the highest law of the land and all other laws are secondary to this document.

Here are some excerpts from the response that I received from his office:

“The progressive initiatives being forced on Americans have no doubt blurred the line of constitutional authority.” “…there is as yet, no consistent legal basis for impeachment…any impeachment proceedings would be an exercise in futility and pure political theater…” “…although many actions taken by the Obama Administration demonstrate an aversion to govern within the constitutional limits of the executive branch, only criminal activities constitute impeachment proceedings…”

Well, isn’t that special.

Mr. Lankford, might I remind you, because based on your voting record you might need a reminder, the United States Constitution IS THE LAW! Last time I checked, breaking the law IS a criminal activity.

If you and the rest of Congress would grow some balls and stand up against the overuse of congressional authority, maybe there be less misuse of it in the first place. But since you and most of the rest of Congress would rather get along to go along to further your political careers, you do not have the courage necessary to represent the people of the United States.

Lack of information and lack of interest on the part of the electorate is a big part of the equation with what is going wrong with this country but it is only part of the equation. It is up to you, our elected officials, to not only fully understand where the power of the executive branch begins and ends, but to hold them accountable when they overstep their bounds.

You are a member of the United States Congress for Christ’s sake!! You have just as much power as they do! Have some balls and stand up for something for once in your life.

You specifically, Mr. Lankford, campaigned that you would help change the status quo in Washington if you were elected and you have done exactly SQUAT to do that? Since you have been elected, it has been same crap, different name in the 5th District here in Oklahoma. What EXACTLY have you done to change the status quo? What EXACTLY have you done to limit the size of government? What EXACTLY have you done to uphold your oath of office to ‘support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic?’

Anyone that willingly violates the Constitution IS a domestic enemy in my book. This is the document that our great country was founded upon and the way you people in Washington DC act so indifferent to it sickens me.

You are on notice and rest assured that I will be everything in my power (limited as it maybe) to ensure that you do NOT get re-elected to your office. You have proved inept at discharging your duties and it is time that we take back our government from the likes of you.

If you are as sick of Rep. Lankford and his lies as much as I am, call his office and let him know:

DC office: 202-225-2132

OKC office: 405-234-9900