They say they’re tired of po­lice ran­domly pulling them over and call­ing im­mig­ra­tion au­thor­it­ies. They’re tired of wear­ing elec­tron­ic ankle mon­it­ors. And they’re tired of the re­peated fin­ger­print­ing out­side homes, gro­cery stores, and busi­nesses.

The city’s Latino im­mig­rants are fed up, and they want the city—and coun­try—to know it.

But those work­ers say they no longer feel wel­come in the city they now call home. They can’t walk down the street with their fam­il­ies, they say, without won­der­ing when an­oth­er SUV with dark-tin­ted win­dows will pick them up and fin­ger­print them. At­tend­ance at the weekly day laborers group meet­ings has more than tripled in the last two years as im­mig­ra­tion raids—and po­lice co­oper­a­tion with im­mig­ra­tion agents—have es­cal­ated.

Fed­er­al con­tract­ors lured them here from oth­er states after air­ing Span­ish tele­vi­sion ads that prom­ised high hourly wages and no threat of de­port­a­tion. The em­ploy­ers could hire un­doc­u­mented im­mig­rants be­cause Pres­id­ent Bush had tem­por­ar­ily sus­pen­ded cer­tain labor laws in the hur­ricane’s af­ter­math.

Or­gan­izers scribble down their state­ments, brain­storm­ing what to in­clude in a form­al de­clar­a­tion they will ask Landrieu to read pub­licly. Most of the people in the room are un­doc­u­mented work­ers from Hon­dur­as and Mex­ico, who ar­rived with more than 10,000 oth­er Latino im­mig­rants to re­build New Or­leans with­in a year of the dev­ast­a­tion that fol­lowed Hur­ricane Kat­rina.

“New Or­leans has great tour­ism be­cause of the work Lati­nos are do­ing in our ho­tels and res­taur­ants,” says an­oth­er.

“Lati­nos are the found­a­tion for the re­con­struc­tion of New Or­leans after Kat­rina,” one man says.

Cheers and ap­plause echo through the gym. Oth­er men line up to take their turn.

“We are do­ing everything pos­sible to end the dis­crim­in­a­tion,” he says in Span­ish. “You don’t need to be afraid any­more.”

The Hon­dur­an man looks noth­ing like Landrieu, but for a mo­ment he ima­gines him­self as the may­or ad­dress­ing the city’s Latino work­ers on tele­vi­sion. He ad­justs his tie, stands be­hind the fake tele­vi­sion and tells the crowd what they most want to hear.

“What would you like to hear the may­or say to New Or­leans?” Lopez asks.

A man in a lime-green polo shirt even­tu­ally comes for­ward. Or­gan­izers hand him a mi­cro­phone and a navy-blue tie. They hold up a card­board box cut out to re­semble a tele­vi­sion screen.

Lopez, an or­gan­izer with the Con­gress of Day Laborers, is look­ing for a vo­lun­teer to play the role of New Or­leans May­or Mitch Landrieu dur­ing a re­cent meet­ing.

NEW OR­LEANS—”Who wants to be the may­or?” Fernando Lopez asks a group of more than 300 Cent­ral Amer­ic­an work­ers gathered in a church gym near the Lower Ninth Ward.

“It’s not fair to treat us like this. We re­built the city,” said Jimmy Bar­raza, an un­doc­u­mented im­mig­rant from Hon­dur­as who has three Amer­ic­an daugh­ters. “We did the dirti­est work, clean­ing out the worms from re­fri­ger­at­ors and throw­ing out dead an­im­als.”

Bar­raza has seen im­mig­ra­tion agents raid his apart­ment com­plex in the sub­urb of Metair­ie three times in the past year and a half. The second time, he and his wife were un­load­ing gro­cer­ies from their car when half a dozen agents sur­roun­ded them, guns drawn. They hand­cuffed Bar­raza and took his wal­let be­fore he could say a word, he said.

Agents then roughed up his stepson, an Amer­ic­an cit­izen, who had come out­side to see what was hap­pen­ing. The 16-year-old boy had re­fused to go back in­side when agents ordered him to, so they threw him against the wall and hand­cuffed him, Bar­raza said. The squad even­tu­ally re­leased the boy and Bar­raza’s wife, who has Tem­por­ary Pro­tec­ted Status, but took Bar­raza to a van to scan his fin­ger­prints. A de­port­a­tion or­der popped up in the sys­tem, so they took him away.

“Hon­estly, I nev­er thought it would hap­pen to me,” said Bar­raza, whose de­port­a­tion was delayed for six months with the help of the Con­gress of Day Laborers. “I nev­er thought someone would sep­ar­ate me from my daugh­ters.”

Bar­raza’s de­port­a­tion has since been delayed twice, and he plans to re­quest an­oth­er six6-month delay be­fore his Janu­ary dead­line. The day laborers group has helped stay the re­mov­al of more than 100 people caught up the raids, most of whom have Amer­ic­an chil­dren, staffers said.

Such de­port­a­tion re­lief is rare in Louisi­ana. The state’s im­mig­ra­tion judges show little le­ni­ency com­pared to oth­er states. So far in fisc­al 2014, they’ve ordered de­port­a­tions in 75 per­cent of the cases they hear in court, ac­cord­ing to data from the Trans­ac­tion­al Re­cords Ac­cess Clear­ing­house at Syra­cuse Uni­versity. Only Geor­gia has a high­er per­cent­age of re­mov­al or­ders.

Though the total num­ber of de­port­a­tions in Louisi­ana has dropped in re­cent years, im­mig­ra­tion ad­voc­ates say en­force­ment has turned more ag­gress­ive and ra­cially mo­tiv­ated. They blame that on two things: The New Or­leans Po­lice De­part­ment cre­ated a broad policy last year that al­lows of­ficers to work with im­mig­ra­tion of­fi­cials. And those im­mig­ra­tion agents have ad­op­ted a na­tion­al en­force­ment strategy that fo­cuses on us­ing mo­bile fin­ger­print scan­ners to find im­mig­rants with crim­in­al con­vic­tions or act­ive de­port­a­tion or­ders. It’s called the Crim­in­al Ali­en Re­mov­al Ini­ti­at­ive. Crit­ics call it “stop-and-frisk for Lati­nos.”

Re­ports of im­mig­ra­tion agents break­ing up a Bible study group and fin­ger­print­ing a His­pan­ic U.S. cit­izen in front of his son garnered na­tion­al at­ten­tion and promp­ted U.S. Rep. Cedric Rich­mond, D-La., to ad­mon­ish the dir­ect­or of U.S Im­mig­ra­tion and Cus­toms En­force­ment.

“Con­duct­ing ran­dom sweeps and raids coupled with tar­get­ing ul­ti­mately in­no­cent in­di­vidu­als must cease,” Rich­mond wrote in Decem­ber to Act­ing Dir­ect­or John Sandweg. “I be­lieve there is a bet­ter way to re­move any crim­in­al law­fully.”

ICE of­fi­cials deny the claims that agents are raid­ing neigh­bor­hoods and ran­domly round­ing up brown people. The Crim­in­al Ali­en Re­mov­al Ini­ti­at­ive, which launched na­tion­wide in 2012, al­lows agents to identi­fy crim­in­als and pre­vi­ous de­portees on the spot and lets them im­me­di­ately re­lease im­mig­rants who don’t fall in­to either cat­egory, said Bry­an Cox, an ICE spokes­man in New Or­leans. Be­fore, agents had to keep people in de­ten­tion cen­ters un­til they could identi­fy them.

“[The strategy] fo­cuses ICE’s lim­ited en­force­ment re­sources on identi­fy­ing, ar­rest­ing, and re­mov­ing at-large crim­in­al ali­ens who pose a risk to com­munity safety,” Cox said in a writ­ten state­ment. “ICE does not con­duct sweeps or raids to tar­get un­doc­u­mented im­mig­rants in­dis­crim­in­ately.”

Im­mig­ra­tion fu­git­ive op­er­a­tions teams in New Or­leans are look­ing for a spe­cif­ic per­son when they show up out­side a su­per­mar­ket or apart­ment com­plex, ac­cord­ing to an ICE of­fi­cial. A com­mon scen­ario looks like this: Someone doesn’t show up for their im­mig­ra­tion court hear­ing, so the judge is­sues a de­port­a­tion or­der. ICE fu­git­ive teams then have to track down and de­port that per­son. They’ll show up at an im­mig­rant’s home, work­place, or an­oth­er place they might fre­quent. Agents will ask people there if they’ve seen the in­di­vidu­al, of­ten ques­tion­ing them about their im­mig­ra­tion status, too.

“They don’t have to an­swer, but nine out of 10 times they will freely ad­mit to be­ing il­leg­ally in the coun­try,” said the ICE of­fi­cial, speak­ing with Na­tion­al Journ­al on the con­di­tion of an­onym­ity.

Then agents run their fin­ger­prints to see if they have crim­in­al con­vic­tions or an act­ive de­port­a­tion or­der. Most people don’t fall in­to those pri­or­ity groups, so they’re usu­ally re­leased on the spot, even if they’re un­doc­u­mented, the of­fi­cial said. The New Or­leans field of­fice does not reg­u­larly track how many people their fu­git­ive teams fin­ger­print with the mo­bile scan­ners.

Many of these op­er­a­tions have happened out­side a pop­u­lar chain of His­pan­ic su­per­mar­kets, ac­cord­ing store man­agers and their cus­tom­ers. Lor­na Torres, busi­ness con­trol­ler for Ideal Dis­count Mar­ket, says stings take place about once a month out­side one of their three stores in the New Or­leans area.

“It def­in­itely scares our cus­tom­ers away,” said Torres. The chain’s own­er has got­ten law­yers in­volved, she said, but they have no con­trol over im­mig­ra­tion en­force­ment that’s not dir­ectly on their prop­erty.

Marta Es­cal­antes avoids shop­ping at one of the chain’s stores in her Mid-City neigh­bor­hood ever since her hus­band was picked up in the park­ing lot. The 33-year-old hotel work­er was two months’ preg­nant that even­ing when she asked her hus­band, Ern­esto Lopez, to buy her a wa­ter­mel­on to ease her naus­ea.

She re­mem­bers the sick­en­ing feel­ing when a friend called to tell her that im­mig­ra­tion agents had raided the su­per­mar­ket in Mid-City and that Lopez’s car was still in the park­ing lot.

“I felt des­per­ate be­cause I thought I was go­ing to be all alone with my little girl,” said Es­cal­antes, who cleaned streets in New Or­leans after Kat­rina and now cleans hotel rooms.

Sure enough, her hus­band had been among those fin­ger­prin­ted and de­tained. Lopez says he nev­er told the agents where he was born, but they fin­ger­prin­ted him any­way.

He says he was sit­ting in his car in the park­ing lot when an agent ap­proached and re­peatedly asked him where he was from. Lopez re­spon­ded each time by say­ing that he lived in New Or­leans.

The agent then told him to get out of the car, he said, and pulled Lopez’s wal­let out of his pock­et without per­mis­sion. The agent found iden­ti­fic­a­tion from Hon­dur­as, so he hand­cuffed and fin­ger­prin­ted Lopez with sev­en oth­er cus­tom­ers agents had stopped. Those without past de­port­a­tions were re­leased, but Ern­esto had been de­por­ted be­fore.

An im­mig­ra­tion judge delayed Lopez’s de­port­a­tion for one year so he could be with his wife when their daugh­ter was born. The year ended in Au­gust, and he has a hear­ing sched­uled in Decem­ber to re­quest an­oth­er delay. That is the only op­tion he has.

Lopez said he feels be­trayed by the city he helped re­build and feels tar­geted be­cause of his skin col­or.

“After [Kat­rina] happened, we were all wel­comed to come re­build the city. And now they re­pay us with de­port­a­tion and sep­ar­at­ing our fam­il­ies,” he said.

Lopez and oth­er mem­bers of the day laborers group have pro­tested out­side the loc­al ICE headquar­ters and have re­peatedly asked the city’s po­lice de­part­ment to stop work­ing with im­mig­ra­tion en­force­ment. Lopez re­mem­bers how New Or­leans po­lice had helped im­mig­ra­tion agents dur­ing the raid, block­ing park­ing lot exits and sur­round­ing streets.

May­or Landrieu and city po­lice Su­per­in­tend­ent Mi­chael Har­ris­on re­cently at­ten­ded one of the weekly meet­ings or­gan­ized by the Con­gress of Day Laborers. They listened to im­mig­rants’ com­plaints but said po­lice would con­tin­ue work­ing with ICE. In an in­ter­view with Na­tion­al Journ­al, Har­ris­on said that po­lice might oc­ca­sion­ally help dir­ect traffic dis­rup­ted dur­ing ICE op­er­a­tions but that their col­lab­or­a­tion with im­mig­ra­tion en­force­ment is strictly on crim­in­al in­vest­ig­a­tions.

“We have no in­terest in civil de­port­a­tions,” Har­ris­on said. “If they ask us to help them with crim­in­al in­vest­ig­a­tions, we’ll help them, but only in crim­in­al in­vest­ig­a­tions.”

The po­lice de­part­ment, which is un­der fed­er­al court su­per­vi­sion be­cause of po­lice mis­con­duct, is in the pro­cess of re­view­ing the bi­as-free poli­cing policy it cre­ated in June 2013, which al­lows of­ficers to work with ICE agents. It’s un­clear if the re­vised policy will lim­it their part­ner­ship.

Na­tion­al Journ­al re­cently vis­ited New Or­leans to see how the city has changed in the nine years since Hur­ricane Kat­rina dis­placed thou­sands of Afric­an-Amer­ic­an fam­il­ies and drew thou­sands of Latino im­mig­rants to re­build the city. In the com­ing weeks, Next Amer­ica will pub­lish a series of stor­ies about the people who are re­de­fin­ing the iden­tity of this icon­ic city.