Less than a month before the election, Republican Gov. Tom Corbett and his challenger, Democrat Tom Wolf, have raised and spent enough money to put the governor's race on track to be the most expensive in Pennsylvania history.

During this election cycle, Wolf has raised $27.6 million and spent $21.1 million compared with Corbett, who has raised $20.6 million and spent $19.3 million.

That's $48.2 million raised on a race where Wolf has consistently been ahead in the polls by a double-digit margin. If the polls hold, Corbett would be the first incumbent governor to lose since Pennsylvania switched to two-term limits for the governor in 1968.

Combined, the two campaigns have run nearly 21,000 TV ads costing more than $13 million. Pennsylvania's state candidates have spent more than most other states on TV ads, according to the Center for Public Integrity.

In September alone, Wolf spent more than $2.4 million on ads and Corbett spent more than $1.8 million. It was the first month that Wolf outspent Corbett on TV ads. Wolf's surge of TV ad spending has continued into October, doubling Corbett's spending on ads during the first two weeks of the month.

MARK MAKELA, REUTERS Republican Gov. Tom Corbett has raised $20.6 million. Republican Gov. Tom Corbett has raised $20.6 million. (MARK MAKELA, REUTERS)

Big GOP donor

The Republican Governors Association gave Corbett $4 million this summer and remains his largest donor and the only contributor to give him more than a million dollars. The RGA, through its state political action committee, has given Corbett more than $5.8 million in total during this election.

These types of large contributions are possible in Pennsylvania because it is one of 12 states that has no limits on how much individuals, state parties or political action committees can give to candidates.

The RGA has raised more than $97 million during this election and more than $300 million since the start of 2009, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

The RGA receives money from individual and corporate donors. This election cycle its top donors are David Koch, of Koch Industries, a manufacturing conglomerate; Sheldon Adelson, of Las Vegas Sands, a casino company; and Paul Singer, of Elliott Management, a hedge-fund management company.

Beyond the RGA's contributions, its chairman, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, has come to Pennsylvania five times to, in part, help Corbett. Such appearances are meant to generate voter excitement, helping GOP candidates in other races.

"This is a bigger game than just winning the governor's mansion," said Zachary Baumann, a lecturer in political science at Penn State University.

Baumann said Republicans are fighting for control of the state Legislature and rallying the party's base. Giving Republicans a reason to vote could matter on Election Day because if Republicans turn out to support Corbett, that will help other Republicans in local races.

Corbett's top individual donor this summer was John Templeton Jr., president and CEO of the John Templeton Foundation, who gave $500,000 on top of the $420,000 he previously gave Corbett.

Other top individual donors to Corbett include John S. Middleton, an owner of the Philadelphia Phillies, who gave Corbett $300,000, but last contributed in February; H.F. Lenfest, owner of the Philadelphia Inquirer, gave Corbett $252,000, most of it in 2013; Terry Pegula, who owns the Buffalo Sabres, recently purchased the Buffalo Bills and made his money in the natural gas industry, gave Corbett $250,000 in September.

Wolf and unions

During the primary, Wolf did not receive a lot of support from labor unions. He had stronger backing from the teachers unions, which gave him more than $1 million.

The Pennsylvania Service Employees International Union was the only labor union among Wolf's top 10 contributors in July.

That all changed over the summer.

Four of Wolf's top 10 contributors this summer were labor unions, who gave him more than $1.4 million. Those unions were the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees ($500,000), International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers ($410,000), Mid-Atlantic Laborers' Political League ($300,000) and United Steelworkers ($200,500).

"What we typically see is groups are strategic in giving money, and this is especially true of labor unions," Baumann said.

Wolf downplayed his relationship with the unions during the first gubernatorial debate, saying he didn't win their endorsement during the primary.

Kristin Kanthak, associate professor of political science at the University of Pittsburgh, said Wolf is not a typical pro-union candidate because he comes from management. Wolf is the non-executive chairman of the Wolf Organization, which builds kitchen cabinets. He was formerly its chairman and CEO. It seemed logical, Kanthak said, that the labor unions might've been a bit cold, initially, to him.

"I think he's trying to distance himself from the unions and he's trying to tell this story that he's a new guy and he's going to clean up Harrisburg," she said.

Wolf's spokesman, Jeffrey Sheridan, said that even though Wolf received a lot of money from the unions, he still is committed to tackling the state's lack of money to solve the pension crisis.

The unions' support "doesn't change the fact that he's going to address that problem," Sheridan said.

Pitman, Corbett's spokesman, questioned whether the union contributions would influence Wolf when it came time to address the state's pension crisis.

"[The unions] want to keep the status quo, protect their bottom lines," he said.

Other than Wolf's $10 million contribution to his own campaign, his top individual donor was M. Thomas Grumbacher, chairman of the board of Bon-Ton department stores. Grumbacher gave Wolf $1 million this summer in addition to more than $1 million he gave him during the primary.

Other top individual donors to Wolf were Louis Appell Jr., former owner of Susquehanna Pfaltzgraff Co., a pottery maker, who has given Wolf $725,000; and Wolf's father, William Wolf, who's given $650,000.