Summer is here and what better way to spend it than at some of the great events in Tulsa and its surrounding communities. From concerts, festivals, arts, culture and sporting events, there’s plenty to see and do while the kiddos are out of school.

See our top picks for local family-friendly summer fun below.

Arts & Culture

Where can you catch a movie under the stars? At the weekly Movies in the Park series, happening every Thursday through October 3 at the Guthrie Green! Grab your blankets and lawn chairs for the movies, which start at 8:30 p.m. Visit Guthrie Green’s website for the movie lineup.

Started in 2007, the First Friday Art Crawl in The Brady Arts District is an art lovers dream. Held on the first Friday of every month, the art crawl features art (of course), free admission to museums and galleries, shopping and much more.

Families can enjoy free admission and hands-on activities, tours and more at the Philbrook Museum on the second Saturday of every month.

Held the third Saturday of every month, the Arts and Humanities Council of Tulsa Hardesty Arts Center (AHHA) hosts Imagination Days. From noon to 5 p.m. kiddos will create ‘make and take’ art projects inspired by current exhibits at the museum. To find out what the theme for each month will be, visit AHHA’s website.

On the third Sunday of every month, head to Gilcrease Museum for their Funday Sunday activities. From noon to 4 p.m. families can enjoy free admission, an art hunt, art stations and more.

Concerts

The beginning of the week can often feel like a drag. However, with Broken Arrow’s Tuesdays in the Park concert series, they don’t have to be! These concerts are held every Tuesday in June from 7 to 9 p.m. at the Central Park Lawn.

Every Tuesday from June 21 through August 5 (excluding July 5) the Starlight Band Summer Concert Series takes place at the Guthrie Green in the Brady District. The concerts begin at 8 p.m. and are a perfect way to spend a Tuesday evening. To view the full concert lineup, visit the Starlight Band’s website.

A little live music every Thursday night from June 2 through August 25? You’ve got that right! Each week Summer’s Fifth Night is held at Utica Square from 7 to 9 p.m. Lawn chairs or blankets are a must for this free family event. To find out which bands are performing and when, visit Utica Square’s website.

Head to LaFortune Park for their First Friday Concert Series, held from May through September. This monthly event is from 7 to 9 p.m. and is completely free. To view the concert lineup, visit the Tulsa County Parks website.

Through July 13, the Woody Guthrie Center has concerts lined up to please any music aficionado’s taste. From their Summer Concert Series to Music on the Green, this summer is going to be one spent listening to great tunes.

Festivals

Held June 4 from 11 a.m. until 2 p.m., the 14th annual Asian-American Festival will be held at the Martin Regional Library, 2601 S. Garnett Road. Participants will learn about the traditions and customs from multiple countries in Asia. This free event sponsored by the Tulsa Library Trust will feature art demonstrations, dancing, arts and crafts and more.

Load up the kids and head to Bartlesville for the 34th annual Sunfest, June 3 through 5! This three-day festival features live music, arts and crafts, a car show, food vendors and more.

From June 11 through 18, Bartlesville will host the OK Mozart International Festival. This annual event features main stage concerts, chamber music series and even has events kids will enjoy. A puppet theatre and Dancing with the Stars are a few events we suggest you don’t miss.

Held in Glenpool, the 38th annual Black Gold Days is happening June 16 through 19 at Black Gold Park. This event will have live entertainment, horseshoeing contest, crafts and even a frog and turtle race!

Held in downtown Bixby, the Green Corn Festival is happening June 25 through 27. From a talent show Friday evening, parade Saturday morning, craft booths, bingo, food vendors and even a carnival, this event is one the family won’t want to miss.

At the famous Woolaroc Museum and Wildlife Preserve, Kidsfest is an annual celebration including pony and wagon rides, crafts, face painting and more. Head to the museum June 25 and 26 from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. for this event.

Help celebrate the Fourth of July at Tulsa’s annual FreedomFest along the Arkansas River! The activities begin at 6 p.m. with inflatables, face painting, food vendors and more. Stick around for fireworks beginning at 9:30 p.m..

Sports

If you’ve got a bicycle and helmet, the Tulsa Tough is a fun opportunity for any and all members of the family. This three-day event held June 9 through 11 extends from the Blue Dome District to Riverside. Everyone from an expert cyclist or a novice kiddo can participate in this ride. If riding isn’t your cup of tea, a cheering section is always necessary at this event.

You’ll be singing “Take Me Out to the Ballgame” all summer long. The Tulsa Drillers, the minor league team of the Colorado Rockies, boast the perfect way to spend a summer day or night! The Drillers host home games throughout the summer: June 7 – 10, 19 – 26, July 6 – 11, 17 – 20, 25 – 31, August 9 – 14, 23 – 26, and September 3 – 5.

Some call it football, some call it soccer, but whatever you call it, you know it’s going to be downright fun! The Tulsa Roughnecks have plenty of home games happening all summer long: June 4 and 17, July 1, 3 and 15, August 4, 6, 18 and 20, and September 24.