GRAND RAPIDS, MI — The half-pound stuffed burgers at

are supposedly the stuff of legend. Apparently, the mythos has reached all the way to midtown New York, where folks at GQ Magazine have apparently bestowed “Best Burger in America” status on the Grand Rapids bar. The shout-out came during a “Morning Joe” bit on MSNBC about GQ’s latest magazine, where deputy editor Michael Hainey

during a discussion on things that America does exceptionally well. The roundtable waded though an orgy of American awesomeness — most notably, supermodel

, who graces the new GQ cover with a red, white and blue popsicle — before getting around to Stella’s during a discussion about how well America does fast food. Host Joe Scarborough, joining the discussion via satellite, waxed philosophic about growing up with the Golden Arches, prompting Hainey to jump in to defend “small batch” fast food. (If you listen closely, you can hear Scarborough mutter “gross,” at the apparent thought of anything besides a Big Mac to satisfy that calorie craving). “The best burger in America is at a place in Grand Rapids, Michigan called ‘Stella’s’ — it’s a video arcade,” said Hainey. It's probably safe to surmise that Hainey has not visited personally, given his characterization of the popular whiskey bar, owned by Mark Sellers, as simply a "video arcade." “When you guys are in Michigan covering Romney next time, I want you to go to Stella’s and the video arcade to get the best burger and then report back about it,” he said. The exchange comes about 6 minutes, 30 seconds into the video. (Romney, by the way, is in Grand Rapids today for an appearance at the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel. Downtown is crawling with Secret Service agents).

Related

:

The Stella’s burger is apparently part of a list of 50 things “America does better than anyone anywhere else,” which the talk show highlighted as a way to counter a growing sense that America is “in decline” somehow. Blockbuster movies, parking lots and Kim Kardashian’s “booty” all make the list, which is included in the GQ edition hitting newsstands soon. Food trucks,

, also got some love from the roundtable. Congressman Fred Upton’s niece, supermodel Kate, is apparently also one of those things America does exceptionally well. The scrumptious cover gets plenty of screen time during the segment. Here's a link to the "

" photo shoot and interview in GQ. “That’s the bounty of America, right there” said Hainey.

Visit msnbc.com for breaking news, world news, and news about the economy