Share Share Shares 0

Join the Revolution and Like Turtleboy Sports on Facebook, and/or follow us on Twitter.

Like the Free Turtleboy Facebook page to follow our posts when our other page is arbitrarily suspended. If we ever get shut down for good, this will become the new Turtleboy Sports main Facebook page.

Want to have your business advert viewed over 2 million times per month? Email us at [email protected] for more information, and check out our website about types of advertising we offer.

Reader Email:

I’m not sure if you have any interest in this situation. However, I do know that you’ll jump on the chance to light up a trashbag, and that’s why I like reading your articles. Since Sunday, there’s been this massive dramatic posting going on on Facebook discussing Fitchburg now page.

My uncle, his girlfriend and kids went to the bike race on Sunday, in Fitchburg. They stopped at this restaurant on Main Street called Rolandos. They were selling burgers outside which they were cooking on a grill, I’m assuming they’re not in their regular menu and were trying to make a quick buck. So they ordered some burgers and asked if they could go eat them inside the restaurant because my uncle’s girlfriend’s daughter is allergic to gluten and dairy so she wanted to get something that she could eat off the regular menu. So they explain this to the owner and ask her if they can take the burgers in the restaurant and eat them there.

Well the owner ended up making a scene and telling them they can’t eat the burgers inside because it’s only customers ordering off of the restaurant menu. They then went home and wrote a post in the discussing Fitchburg now page telling people not to go there and the owner responds in an aggressive inappropriate manner. Like swearing threatening. Every person in the city of Fitchburg is commenting.

Yesterday Kerri (my uncles gf) posted a screen shot of the owner of this restaurant sending her nasty and threatening messages on Facebook and this owner is still bad mouthing everyone. She continues to make posts daily on that page about the specials of the day. Yesterday someone posted a link to the restaurants Facebook page. So I decide to take a look at the reviews. Not only are there horrible reviews but the owner comments on them and attacks the customer for posting a bad review. Please do yourself a favor and go look at the posts. There are now 4 separate posts. If nothing else, the lack of common sense of this trashbag will give you a good laugh.

So we actually looked into this and it’s pretty hilarious. Nothing more entertaining than a nutjob with her own business. This was the original complaint on the Discussing Fitchburg Now Facebook page:

Basically they bought the burgers outside, but the daughter wanted something else that was only being served inside, so they wanted to sit down at the many, many empty tables so they could order her something. Apparently this was deemed to be unreasonable by the owner, who told them they were being reserved. Because apparently some Rolando’s in Fitchburg is so popular that you have to reserve a seat months in advance. However, according to the only other guy who was eating in Rolando’s, there were no reservations:

Anyway, in business generally the customer is always right. It’s better to just please someone, even if they’re wrong, because if you make them feel good about their experience then there’s a good chance they’ll come back. But it appears as if Lorenda Grella, the owner of Rolando’s, does not subscribe to this philosophy. At Rolando’s they never make mistakes:

OK. That’s one way run a business!!

At Rolando’s the mentally unbalanced owner tells people you gave her the middle finger:

Even if the only customer in there denies that this actually happened.

Lorenda also disputes the amount of home fries per portion:

Wait…..she’s making these posts at 3:46 AM? This lady is amazing. She literally scours the Internet 24/7 shitting on anyone who has anything negative to say about Rolando’s. Oh you think Rolando’s sucks? That must mean you’re a moron because everyone who matters says Rolando’s is perfect. I suppose that’s one way to build your brand.

Anyway, we went on Rolando’s Facebook page to check out the reviews. And the emailer was right – this woman literally shits on everyone who doesn’t give Rolando’s five stars:

Not sure what exactly this means, but I’m pretty sure she’s telling this customer to get a Happy Meal instead.

LIES!!!!

That’s it, you’re banned from Rolando’s!!! And if you have negative things to say about this fine Fitchburg eatery then Lorenda is gonna bring up all those “rumors” about you:

This woman has banned more people than the soup nazi!!!

Here’s the best one though. Apparently a customer gave Rolando’s another negative review, but instead of politely telling the customer thank you for their business and promise to work on their issues, Lorenda decided it would be better for business if she privately messaged this customer and called her a fat cunt and implied that she was gonna have someone kick her ass:

“Check mate cunt.” This is what it looks like when you give zero fucks and own a business.

Anyway, there were a million comment on this thread of the Discussing Fitchburg Now Facebook page.

It was the big buzz of the twin cities this week. Lorenda didn’t do herself any favors by posting all week about Rolando’s specials:

Fresh brenedict!! Turtleboy Jr’s favorite!!!

Farm to table. And by that she means “Walmart frozen foods section, to deep fryer, to the table you’re not allowed to eat it atz.”

And it doesn’t matter if people think that she’s nuts, because the “paster” from St. Bernard’s (which is a catholic church, so they don’t have pastors) has blessed Rolando’s and God is on their side:

Her restaurant is full in her own delusional mind. No wonder she’s giving out free coffee!! Plus if she runs out God can always just make more. Blessed.

Anyway Lorenda, you seem like a really normal, perfectly sane woman, and your business practices are second to none. Based on your Facebook page it appears as if you are a lonely cat woman:

If so, I know a guy up in Fitchburg (who shall go unnamed) who you’d get along with real well. You guys should meet up for free coffee sometime. He can regale you with some conspiracy theories about the good ol’ boys and Turtleboy plotting to ruin your business. Trust me, you guys would have LOTS to talk about.

Anyway, this woman is basically running her business like Turtleboy runs his blog. When people say bad things about us we fire right back. But then again, we’re a confrontational blogging site, and Rolando’s is restaurant. Pretty sure that’s not generally the best way to get people in your empty restaurant:

Oh yea, and here’s a tip Lorenda – when you put pictures of food up on your website, you should try to make it look like something people can’t make at home:

That looks like a meatball on some sort of crusty bun, with nothing but lettuce on it. No cheese, bacon, ketchup, pickles, or onions. Just a big slab of lettuce and a 10 cent bag of potato chips with some guy in the background. This is not going to help bring people to your restaurant. Just sayin.

We urge you to support the Turtleboy Sponsors by doing business with them. Without them none of this is possible. Click on any of them to check out their sites or Facebook pages.

Wormtown Brewery, Union Tavern, Scavone Plumbing, Bennie’s Cafe, JJM Insurance, Smokestack Urban Barbecue, Smitty’s Tavern, Julio’s Liquors, Solarreviews.net, The Gun Parlor Range, Attorney Anthony Salerno, Harris Auto Body, Rotti Power Equipment in West Boylston

Want to have your business advert viewed over 2 million times per month? Email us at [email protected] for more information, and check out our website about types of advertising we offer.

Follow us on Twitter and like us on Facebook