Australia have been the chief beneficiaries of England’s comprehensive series defeat in India with Steve Smith’s men moving up to second on the International Cricket Council’s Test rankings after the final match in Chennai.

The 4-0 result in India’s favour, sealed by Ravindra Jadeja’s fifth-day seven-wicket haul and Karun Nair’s marathon triple-century, saw England slip from second to fifth in the ICC’s rankings.

Australia moved up to second spot as a result while South Africa (third) and Pakistan (fourth) both moved up a position.

Australia are now just one spot below top-ranked India, with the chance to increase their 105 ranking points tally with a favourable series result against Pakistan, after drawing first blood in the three-match series at the Gabba.

But the dominant performance of Virat Kohli’s side on their home turf has reaffirmed their status at the top of the charts. They increased their ranking points tally from 115 to 120, a 15-point lead over the Aussies.

England, having previously been level with Australia before Tuesday’s latest update, lost four points but are five clear of sixth-place New Zealand

Regardless of results for the rest of the year, India will go into 2017 as the top-ranked Test side with the ICC confirming the charts won’t be updated until the conclusion of Australia’s series with Pakistan in January.

The side at the top of the rankings on April 1 2017 will receive US$1 million. The second-placed side will be awarded $ 500,000 while the third and fourth placed sides will receive $200,000 and $100,000 each.

Smith was presented with the ICC Test Championship Mace earlier this year after Australia rose to the top spot, a position they squandered following their 0-3 series whitewash in Sri Lanka in August.

International cricket is more affordable than ever this summer, with adult tickets from $30, kids from $10 and family packages from $65 across every day of international cricket. Price for purchase at match. Transaction fee from $6.95 applies to online and other purchases. For more information and to purchase tickets, click here.