So You Want To Be A Product Manager? [Part 2]

andrea saez Blocked Unblock Follow Following Oct 5, 2015

This is part two of my previous blog post: So you want to be a product manager?

Previously I wrote about some basics to get you started in the product management world, including some great resources and key points to follow. If you’ve covered elemental steps to get you into the exciting product management cosmos, what can you do to actually get hired?

Make yourself visible

You might think you’ve got all the chops, but unless you’re not visible to the public eye, how is anyone going to know who you even are? Blog about the things you like, write! Get out there! So not everyone may share your opinions, but at least you’re not afraid of getting out there. The more you write (and Tweet) about a specific subject(s) — the more visibility you will have, and the more you will start breaking into the network.

Network

Speaking of network… network! Attending conferences and meetups are a great way to not only meet potential employees, but also inspiring minds. This will give you a chance to meet others, learn from them, and maybe even gain a little confidence about speaking in front of and to others — which you will be inevitably doing.

Work on your confidence

I was asked a little while ago about what to do to get hired as a product manager above anyone else, which is half the inspiration to this post. The other half lies in one simple statement: make yourself invaluable. Don’t ask for a job, tell them thatthey need you. Remember, you will be part of a team that will give the product vision and direction; you are there to solve a problem, but how can you be a leader if you don’t show you’ve got the confidence to do so?

A great way to build up your confidence is to join your local Toastmasters meetup to work on your public speaking. Believe me, even until today I have a hard time with this, but the more you speak publicly, the easier it gets. You can then go onto speaking to clients, and give webinars and presentations about what you’re working on.

Maintain Relationships

You’ve networked, you’ve put yourself out there — now don’t drop off the radar. Maintaining good relationships is the single most important thing you can do as you’re looking for a job. Even beyond that, you never know who may end up being your client, or will end up referring you to a potential client. Everyone wants to meet good people, right?

Maintaining relationships isn’t hard. Check in with them, Tweet, send an email — you’re not short on possibilities. If the other person has just released a new product, congratulate them! Maybe even ask them for some advice. Cultivate relationships like flowers and don’t let them die. This will also be an invaluable skill as you’re working with clients. Remember, everyone likes to be acknowledged.

And of course, last but not least, make sure you’re working with the right tools! ProdPad lets you improve and nurture those communication skills by allowing you to publish a public roadmap and keep track of all that great feedback you’ll be getting. From us to you, the best of luck!