Mark Hamill Reveals Intimate Account of Experience with Star Wars

In a recent interview with the Orlando Sentinel, Mark Hamill revealed his thoughts and feelings on his involvement with the new J.J. Abrams film, the original trilogy, and the prequels.

On his place in the "Star Wars" franchise: "In my mind, there was a beginning, and a middle and an end for me and my association with George's trilogy. It was firmly in the past. When the prequels came out, I watched from a distance, but I was totally fine."

On preparing for 'Star Wars VII": "I've altered my diet. I've started working out, there's that. But on the film itself: I toured the departments, I've looked at wardrobe, and I saw the creature shop. I went around and met al the cast people, saw the technicians working on some new things."

(Just casually strolled around the set for the new "Star Wars" movie and saw pretty much everything... just another Tuesday for Luke Skywalker.)

When asked why he agreed to reprise his role in "Star Wars Episode VII": "Look, I'm aware that a lot of people don't care one way or another, but for the UPF's- the ultra passionate fans — they would come after me like the angry townspeople with torches in the old Frankenstein pictures. I would have a lot to answer for if I didn't at least try to make the effort. It's not like I had a choice. I feel like I was called up for service by the Selective Service."

On reuniting with the original cast: "I hadn't seen Tony Daniels of [sic] Carrie [Fisher] or Harrison [Ford] or Peter Mayhew in ages... It was wonderful to see them again, because I didn't expect to. Again, this is all so unexpected. It's like getting out that pair of pants you haven't worn in five years and finding a 20-dollar bill in the pocket. Oh, this is nice."

On his level of fandom: "I haven't seen those movies since they were in movie theaters. I don't watch them on home theater or DVD. There are people who are far more expert in it than I am. They know more, way more, about them than I do, and they care more... You don't have to love them, but I am surprised sometimes at how vehemently [sic] they get if they're not satisfied, which is scary. I have this feeling that no matter what we do there's going to be a faction that really is disappointed. You just can't live up to that. Any kind of reunion type endeavor, whatever it is... you can never go home again."

On Disney's purchase of Lucasfilm: "I think [George Lucas] really feels a great relief of passing this property into the right hands. I couldn't be more excited even nominally [being] a part of the Disney family."

image credit: Screenrant