0 Shares 0



0

0

0





Saudi backed Takfiris massacred 49 Yemeni civilians in Al Sarari village of Taiz.

The Saudi aggression’s hirelings massacred and burned 49 people, destroyed more than 50 houses after looting them in al-Sarari village in Taiz province, a local official said on Tuesday.

Saudi hirelings also arrest 38 people including women and children. According to reports More than 125 villagers abducted in al-Sarari. The Saudi backed mercenaries also detonated Jamal Addin Mosque a Shafi’i Imam in the al-Sarari village and demolished his tomb.

Later the Riyadh's hirelings pounded the besieged village of al-Sarari in Taiz province.

The Riyadh mercenaries begin targeting al-Sarari village on Monday night with more than 130 shells.

Saudi mercenaries also burned a library full of old books about sophism in al-Sarari village.

The United Nations called for a humanitarian truce in the Yemeni province of Taiz after the massacre, reported by Reuters.

James McGoldrick, the U.N. Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, voiced alarm at increasing bloodshed in the southwestern Taiz Governorate, particularly the al-Sarari area, and the closure of Taiz city, the regional capital.

"We call on you to swiftly intervene to stop these gangs and limit the massacres they have begun to commit against unarmed civilians," Ahmed al-Msawa said in the letter, seen by Reuters.

He urged all warring parties to agree immediately to a "humanitarian pause" to protect civilians and cooperate with humanitarian agencies to help treat and evacuate war-wounded and deliver urgently needed medicine into the embattled zone.

McGoldrick warned both parties that holding civilian populations hostage and depriving them of humanitarian assistance was illegal under international humanitarian law.

Hadi supporters control most of Taiz, Yemen's third largest city with an estimated pre-war population of 300,000.

There were conflicting reports on the fighting in al-Sarari, a Houthi stronghold southeast of Taiz captured by troops loyal to President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi earlier this week.

A Houthi envoy on a ceasefire committee assigned to oversee a shaky truce in Taiz wrote to the U.N. that Sarari residents had been subjected to "war crimes" including house burnings and the detention of 49 civilians including women and children.