We’re not the only ones wondering what’s going on with Curt Schilling. Singer Jason Isbell tweeted a picture of Schill, pointing out that the former Red Sox pitcher isn’t looking like himself these days.

Schilling looking like he's about a month away from sleeping on a heating grate pic.twitter.com/X3nKg5HaXk — Jason Isbell (@JasonIsbell) October 13, 2016

The picture was taken from an appearance Schilling made this week on Fox Business Network during which he raised more than a few eyebrows with his rabid defense of a remark Donald Trump made while talking to a group of preteen girls. (About one of the girls, the Republican presidential candidate said: “I am going to be dating her in 10 years. Can you believe it?”)

But Schilling won’t leave it alone. Friday, after WEEI’s John Tomase questioned why Schilling would defend Trump’s weird remark, Schilling called in to the station’s “Kirk & Callahan Show” and harangued Tomase, opening his tirade with an F-bomb. (No, the censors didn’t catch it in time.)

Advertisement

“You’re a liar if you’ve never said, ‘Wow she’s a beautiful young lady,’ ” Schilling said. “It was stupid, it was not appropriate in any possible way for [Trump] . . . to go to the dating part, but you created a ‘nonflict’ — a conflict that doesn’t actually exist.”

Get The Weekender in your inbox: The Globe's top picks for what to see and do each weekend, in Boston and beyond. Sign Up Thank you for signing up! Sign up for more newsletters here

(It’s worth noting that a year ago, after Schilling tweeted about his daughter’s plans to play softball at Salve Regina University, some of his followers responded with crude or sexually suggestive tweets, which made Schilling irate.)

Friday, he spent several minutes hollering insults at Tomase, calling him “a phony,” “a scumbag,” “an idiot,” and “a gutless piece of garbage.”

Given a chance to respond, Tomase told Schilling he still plans to vote for him for the Baseball Hall of Fame.

“I don’t care,” said Schilling.

Advertisement

Listen to the call here. Warning foul language.