THE search continues for the person who killed eight members of one family “execution style” Friday in four separate homes in rural Ohio.

The dead have been identified as members of the Rhoden family. Authorities spoke to 100 of their relatives and friends gathered at a church on Friday.

According to the Morning Ledger, five members of the family have been identified: recent father and husband-to-be Frankie Rhoden and his 20-year-old fiancee Hannah Hazel Gilley, young mother Hanna May Rhoden, grandmother-to-be Dana Lynn Rhoden, 37, and 16-year-old Chris

Rhoden.

“Each one of the victims appears to have been executed, each one of the victims appears to have been shot in the head,” Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine said.

Authorities have interviewed more than 30 people at this time and will talk to more of them as the investigation continues, Mr DeWine said during a news conference.

Separately, in rural Georgia, a man who shot and killed five people during two separate attacks as part of a domestic dispute was found dead in his home early Saturday.

Authorities in Ohio have warned surviving relatives of the slain and local residents to be careful and said the killer should be considered armed and dangerous.

DeWine said it was possible more than one person was involved in the homicides.

“It’s heartbreaking,” Mr DeWine said. “The one mum was killed in her bed with the four-day-old right there.” A motive isn’t clear, authorities said.

A dozen Bureau of Criminal Investigation agents were called on Friday morning to Pike County, an economically struggling area in the Appalachian region 130km east of Cincinnati.

The FBI in Cincinnati also said it was closely monitoring the situation and had offered assistance if needed.

“There is a threat there and I believe that threat to be armed and dangerous,” Pike County Sheriff Charles Reader said.

Cincinnati-area businessman Jeff Ruby offered $25,000 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of anyone involved in case.



Attorney general confirms "execution style" murders in Pike Co. 5 adults/2children. Latest at 4 @Local12 pic.twitter.com/0t0C8Ll8V6 — Rich Jaffe (@RAJaffe) April 22, 2016

Meanwhile, the body of suspect Wayne Anthony Hawes, 50, was recovered on Saturday by authorities in his home in Appling, northeastern Georgia, Columbia County Sheriff Captain Andy Shedd said.

Shedd said the Friday night shootings stemmed from a domestic dispute that left three men and two women dead.

Sheriff deputies responded to a home and discovered three victims. Shortly after, they attended a second scene where a man and a woman were also found dead.

The victims have been identified as Roosevelt Burns, 75, Rheva Mae Dent, 85, Kelia Clark, 31, Lizzy Williams, 59, and Shelly Williams, 62.

Hawes knew the victims, Shedd said.

Hawes’s daughter said her father was a “ticking time bomb.”

Lauren Hawes said that she and her 1-year-old daughter hid in a neighbour’s house while her father, went on a shooting rampage that killed five people, including her grandmother and cousin.

Lauren Hawes says her 50-year-old father had threatened to kill her grandmother and mother a day before the fatal shootings.

Lauren Hawes says her father was upset after her mother ended their relationship. She says her father kicked both her and her daughter out of his home two about weeks ago.

Columbia County Sheriff Captain Andy Shedd said in a statement that the body the Hawes was recovered Saturday by authorities in his northeastern Georgia home.