Weeks before the local gun control group People For a Safer Society lost its court battle to try to stop a gun shop from being built in Niles, the village of Skokie fulfilled a promise to the group.

Skokie officials repeatedly said they would not join the lawsuit despite the group's campaign to bring Skokie on board. But what Skokie Mayor George Van Dusen promised was that it would seriously consider expressing the village's concerns in a non-binding letter to Niles.

In the letter to Niles Mayor Andrew Przybylo, Van Dusen said many Skokie residents have expressed "deep concern and dismay" over the Niles Village Board's vote allowing Sportsman's Club and Firearms Training Academy to operate at 6143 Howard St.

"We ask you to reflect on the fact that your decision may impact Skokie residents, businesses and schools due to the proximity to the gun range," he said. "As elected officials, we all hold public safety to be of paramount concern and we must carefully weigh our actions with this in mind."

Przybylo said he was not surprised when he received the letter because "I was with (Van Dusen) four or five days before and he told me he was sending the letter and I said, 'OK, great.'"

Przybylo said the letter will have no bearing on Niles officials' actions regarding the gun shop and range because "we've made up our mind to do exactly what (Skokie) has done and other municipalities, including Chicago, have done and that is to create the hardest, toughest operating ordinance related to the gun store."

"We'll go in there and check their inventory and make sure the people they have selling guns are qualified," he said. Przybylo added that the village will also work to ensure the shop does not engage in any illegal transactions, commonly called "straw purchases," in which someone buys a gun for another individual who is prohibited by law from possessing one or for an individual who does not want their name associated with the gun sale. He also said the village would make sure the store does not sell firearms repeatedly to people who have reported lost or stolen guns, because "that's a sure sign guns are going into the wrong hands."

People For a Safer Society repeatedly and publicly asked Skokie to join its lawsuit because the planned gun shop is located near the Skokie border and some of its schools.

Village officials said it should not do so because a municipality's home rule authority allows it to govern on certain matters without interference.

Both Skokie and Niles have home rule powers. If the village were to join the lawsuit, Van Dusen told the group, it would have difficulty taking a legal position in court supporting home rule authority and then saying "except when someone is passing something we don't like."

Trustee Randy Roberts, in an earlier emotional address to the group, proposed the letter but supported that the village should not join the lawsuit.

In the letter sent to Niles, Van Dusen made a pitch to the mayor to consider the group's concerns.

"While we are not part of this litigation," he wrote, "we believe that honest, respectful, communication between parties often brings a more satisfying and just result beyond what any lawsuit can accomplish. We ask that you take the time, while the court's ruling on the motion to dismiss is pending, to meet with advocates who oppose the current location and to try to reach a solution which addresses their safety concerns."

Despite the letter, however, the ruling on the lawsuit moved forward last month without Niles and People For a Safer Society coming to an agreement.

For the second time, a Cook County judge Feb. 19 granted motions to dismiss the suit filed by attorneys for Niles and 6143 Howard Partners, the company that plans to open the gun shop.

Przybylo said a draft operations ordinance is "95 percent done." He said village officials would like to work with the owners behind the gun shop and range on the local regulations but have had difficulty scheduling a time to meet.

"We'll pass the operations ordinance on our own if (the owner) doesn't have time to meet with us," Przybylo said.

Asked when he expects the range and shop to open, Przybylo said "my guess is nine months." He said the operations ordinance will be presented for Village Board approval sometime before the summer.

A lawyer for People For a Safer Society said the group plans to appeal the ruling and push forward with its protest.

Lee V. Gaines contributed.

misaacs@pioneerlocal.com

Twitter: @SKReview_Mike