Pope Francis said on Sunday that Christians and the Roman Catholic Church should seek forgiveness from gay people for the way they had treated them.

In an hour-long conversation with reporters on the plane taking him back to Rome from Armenia,the pontiff was asked if he agreed with recent comments by a German Roman Catholic cardinal that the Church should apologise to gay people.

The pope recalled Church teachings, saying: “[Gay people] should not be discriminated against. They should be respected, accompanied pastorally.

“I think that the Church not only should apologise … to a gay person whom it offended but it must also apologise to the poor as well, to the women who have been exploited, to children who have been exploited by (being forced to) work. It must apologise for having blessed so many weapons.”

The Church teaches that homosexuality is not sinful but homosexual acts are, and that homosexuals should try to be chaste.

Source: The Guardian, UK.

My comment:

The Pope should first and foremost apologize to us all, for being “a pope”. There is nothing as such in the Bible. The Vatican has usurped authority. The Pope do neither represent God of the Bible, nor any followers of Jesus, also called Christians.

Next, the Pope should be able to read the Bible. And not let political correctness be the base of his philosophies. God of the Bible killed all people in the city of Sodom and Gomorra. These cities was morally retarded beyond repair. Homosexual offenders, even demanding sex with visiting angels.

Genesis 19:5

They called to Lot, ‘Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we can have sex with them.’

Paul the Apostles, call men who have sex with men for perverts. That is exactly what they are. They live in rebellion and sin, and will ripe God’s judgment. They are bound to spend eternity in the lake of fire.

1 Corinthians 6:9

Or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor men who have sex with men

True Christianity is not defined by loyalty to the Pontiff, but loyalty to the infallible word of God. Let all men be liars. God is truth. He has to be worshiped in spirit and in truth.

Psalm 101:4

The perverse of heart shall be far from me; I will have nothing to do with what is evil.

To all who portray the Roman Catholic Church as a Christian Church: Beware that all who serve the antichrist, will have to repent. Or they will face stern judgment, together with this spiritual prostitute. It is shameful and a disgrace, that you work with the enemy, and let them come into your camp. Like a trojan horse, the Catholic clergy will deifier you and lead you astray towards the broad gates of destruction.

Luke 17: 28-30.

‘It was the same in the days of Lot. People were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building, But the day Lot left Sodom, fire and sulphur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all.

‘It will be just like this on the day the Son of Man is revealed.

I have loved you enough, to warn you. Repent or perish. May Jesus the Messiah have mercy on all deceived souls. Amen.

Written by Ivar.

Advertisements