The Blackwater Gulch Second Edition Gameworld Ruleset includes 1 full color Hardback rulebook, 1 deck of 54 Loot Cards, 1 deck of 64 Second Edition Character Cards, 6 custom 6-sided dice and a collection of thick cardstock tokens that can be used to keep track of special damage effects, objectives or loot caches.

If you are familiar with our original rules, you will see that the Second Edition plays very much the same way. Only a few balancing tweaks have been made to gameplay.

The biggest change is updated Horror Western setting and the way in which you recruit members into you gang. Using our pre-made characters, your gang leader's card will tell you who he is able to recruit and each leader also has a special skill that applies to the other members of his gang. If you're feeling creative, you can also create your very own characters from scratch. Click here to download a preview of the rulebook (this version is incomplete and has not been proofread, but the core rules are all there).

Another new addition to the game is the Loot Deck. This adds a whole new dynamic, allowing your gang to find powerful weapons and equipment during the game, and use these new treasures against their foes! The box set includes 1 full deck, but also each gang starter set includes new, unique loot cards that you can mix into your decks. Click here to download a sample of most of the cards that will be found in the core deck. Green items are common, blue items are rare and purple items are infamous!

We expect these new rules to have a retail price of $50. The Kickstarter price is $45, while Gunslinger backers get it for an even bigger discount.

All of our new miniatures are being produced in a high detail resin/HIPs blend called Unicast. These figures have a very high level of detail and are all one piece, no assembly required, and they are ready to play right out of the box. These are NOT “board game miniatures”, the detail level is the same as any metal or resin miniature, yet much more durable. Our miniatures all measure 30mm to the eye, with mostly-heroic proportions. They mix well with most other heroic scale miniatures out there, from 28-32mm.

For this new edition of the game we are starting off with three all new gangs (and one resculpted classing gang) taking to the streets of Blackwater Gulch to clean them up, or to rule them.

We expect each gang starter set to have a retail price of $30. The Kickstarter price is $25 each, while Gunslinger backers can get each one for $20!

The Unsung

Like drifters, the Unsung travel the lands, searching for signs of corrupt Immortals and secretly dispatching them while the prying eyes of an unsuspecting public are turned the other way.

The Wicked

There are few gangs more sinister than The Wicked. A motley crew of undead creatures and demonic hellions, they stalk the Bad Lands searching for lost souls to devour.

The Wormwood Wardens

This vicious pack of Skinwalkers rules over the Wormwood Forest, savagely attacking anyone who strays too far into their domain.

The Tranquility Crew

We will be updating the miniatures for the Tranqility Crew and converting them to Unicast as well as our 3 new gangs. Click here to learn more about the gang. Note that the picture below is for our original metal miniatures and the new ones will likely have all new poses.

You may select 3 of any of the above gangs for the Gunslinger pledge level, or increase your pledge amount by $20 to get all 4.

Size and Scale

Here is a photo of the production miniatures for the Unsung, along with some other miniatures and a ruler for size reference. Click here to enlarge.

If you would like to receive any of the below items separately, simply increase your pledge amount to cover the prices listed below. Remember all Gunslinger or Bounty Hunter backers receive one copy of all unlocked bonus items for free!

Blackwater Gulch Second Edition Boxed Ruleset

$45 Regular Price / $40 for Gunslingers

(Est. retail price $50)

New Gang Starter Sets

$25 Regular Price / $20 for Gunslingers

(Est. retail price $30 each)

Solo Miniature

$8 each / One free unlocked mini for Gunslingers & Bounty Hunters

(Est. retail price $10 each)

See the list below or click here.

Classic Gang Starter Sets (Metal Miniatures)

$15-25 Add On Items - click here or read update #1 for a complete list.

Note: Pledges that include classic miniatures must ship from the USA, or you may order them separately and get them from our online store now.

You may increase your pledge by $8 for each solo miniature you would like to receive. Gunslinger and Bounty Hunter backers may receive one solo miniature of your choice for free! New characters will be unlocked as our funding goal reaches the amounts listed below. Click here for a more detailed image.

Shipping costs are not included in the pledge amounts. Instead, you will be able to pay for shipping separately in our Pledge Manager after the campaign ends. This is the easiest way to handle shipping since many backers will be receiving different items and there won’t be a fixed shipping cost for all.

We will be using ShipNaked to fulfill the campaign and ship everything. They offer hassle-free worldwide shipping so you won’t need to worry about customs or VAT or anything like that. Shipping costs will depend upon the zone you are in, and costs are based on weight. While our new plastic miniatures are relatively light, the Boxed Ruleset will weigh a little over 3 pounds. Thus, we expect the shipping weight for the Gunslinger pledge to be around 4 pounds. All packages will ship from the ShipNaked warehouse in New Hampshire, USA. Here are the estimated shipping rates:

Zone 1 - $4 per pound. USA, UK, Germany and Australia only.

Shipping a Gunslinger pledge to these countries will cost $16.

Zone 2 - $8 per pound, maximum $30. includes US-owned territories and the following countries, which include the vast majority of international shipments: Argentina (AR), Austria (AT), Bahrain (BH), Belarus (BY), Belgium (BE), Belize (BZ), Bulgaria (BG), Brunei Darussalam (BN), Canada (CA), Cayman Islands (KY), Chile (CL), China (CN), Colombia (CO), Costa Rica (CR), Croatia (HR), Cyprus (CY), Czech Republic (CZ), Denmark (DK), Estonia (EE), Finland (FI), France (FR), Greece (GR), Hong Kong (HK), Hungary (HU), Iceland (IS), India (IN), Indonesia (ID), Ireland (IE), Israel (IL), Italy (IT), Japan (JP), Korea, Republic of (KR), Latvia (LV), Lithuania (LT), Luxembourg (LU), Malaysia (MY), Malta (MT), Montenegro (ME), Netherlands (NL), New Zealand (NZ), Norway (NO), Peru (PE), Philippines (PH), Poland (PL), Portugal (PT), Qatar (QA), Romania (RO), Saudi Arabia (SA), Serbia (RS), Singapore (SG), Slovakia (SK), Slovenia (SI), South Africa (ZA), Spain (ES), Sweden (SE), Switzerland (CH), Taiwan (TW), Thailand (TH), Turkey (TR), Ukraine (UA), United Arab Emirates (AE)

Shipping a Gunslinger pledge to these countries will cost $30.

Zone 3: $20 per pound, includes Brazil, Mexico, Russia and any countries not listed above. Unfortunately, we cannot offer a maximum shipping price for Zone 3.