

Click Looking for the User Manual?Click here

Price-Performance Champ The Freezer 33 is based on the ARCTIC Freezer i32, but features several improvements that boost performance and further reduce noise. Thanks to the award winning cooling performance, the Freezer 33 is the perfect gadget for PC enthusiasts looking for an affordable solution for the CPU cooling.

Semi Passive Cooling By semi passive performance the Freezer 33 provides again a special feature. A sophisticated fan controller that was developed by German engineers allows passive cooling of the CPU during simple applications such as surfing and creating documents. The 120 mm fan only starts up at a PWM signal with 40 % pulse width. This saves energy, extends the service life and makes the cooler at low load completely silent.

Maximum Performance for Highest-End CPUs The contact surface of the Freezer 33 heatpipes does not cover the full protection cap, but, more importantly, are right where the processor DIE is and cover even the largest versions (18 core) completely. This leads to maximum performance.

Improved Heat Dissipation The Freezer 33 has off-centered heat pipes that dispense the heat in a more efficient than the centered ones of its predecessors. Also, the layout of the 49 aluminium fins creates micro vortices that boost the airflow and circulate it around the heatpipes.

Optimal Compatibility Fast and easy to install and extremely reliable, the mounting system is compatible with Intel and AMD sockets. Also, the low footprint of the Freezer 33 avoids interference with the RAM, even if there are two fans used ensuring the best compatibility.

Enhanced Bearing Due to a new alloy/lubricant combination developed in Germany, the friction within the bearing is reduced and a greater efficiency is achieved. This way, there is less heat development as well as less bearing noise and you can enjoy a longer service life of your cooler.

Easy Installation & Safe Transportation Thanks to different mounting models for various sockets, a backplate and a significantly lower weight compared to the i30, the Freezer 33 is not only fool-proof to install, but also absolutely transport safe. * The AM4 backplate comes with your mainboard, spare is available through our support.