Welcome to the Publix Discount Program. The Publix Discount Program Web site is an independent gateway to a platform of special discounts and services being offered exclusively to Publix associates and their family members.



Before providing your information to the Publix Discount Program Web site and/or Web sites of any of its third party providers, please read carefully the Terms of Use Agreement and Privacy Statement posted on the Home Page of the Publix Discount Program Web site and similar notices on the home page of each individual site to which the Publix Discount Program may link. These statements contain the terms and conditions governing your access to and use of the site, and how any personal information you choose to supply (including your credit card information) will be used and disclosed to others.



The Publix Discount Program is not a Publix-sponsored benefit program. Publix does not endorse nor take responsibility for any of the products, services or practices promoted on this Web site or the Web sites of the third party providers.



Access to the Publix Discount Program Web site is provided at no cost to you, and Publix does not benefit from your participation. There are no commissions or incentives paid to Publix as a result of the products or services you may choose to purchase. Publix will not be monitoring individual usage of the Web site. However, general Web site traffic will be monitored in the aggregate for the purpose of understanding the extent to which Publix as a group is visiting the Publix Discount Program Web site and for quality improvement purposes.



Beneplace, Inc. administers and is responsible for the Publix Discount Program Web site. All questions, concerns or issues with this Web site in particular, or the discount platform in general, should be directed to the Beneplace customer service line at 1-800-683-2886 or Web site at www.Beneplace.com.



Neither Publix nor Beneplace makes any representation that the evaluations, pricing, information or other content contained on the site or that of any linked third party provider is accurate, reliable, timely, complete, error-free or that your use of the Web site (including the provision of your credit card information) is secure. Additionally, neither Publix nor Beneplace makes any representation that the prices you pay for products and services offered through the Publix Discount Program Web site and its linked sites are better than what you would pay if you negotiated with the third party providers on your own, taking into account certain offers and discounts that third party providers may offer the general public from time to time. Your participation in the programs and discounts offered by the third party providers is voluntary. Should you choose to participate, YOUR USE OF THE PUBLIX DISCOUNT PROGRAM AND ITS LINKED SITES IS SOLELY AT YOUR OWN RISK.