The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com.

Warning: Offensive Language

White slave masters never admired their black slaves, yet white sports fans all around the world worship their favorite black athletes. Nike endorsements, sports arenas, and college campuses aren’t exactly what I’d call slave ships, chains or whips. Yet, if you listen to black activists, ESPN analysts Michael Wilbon and Jamele Hill, or Black Lives Matter, you’d get the impression that racism and oppression are just as prevalent in America today as it’s ever been. Nothing could be further from the truth, and most American’s instinctively know it.

Democrat overreach has caused a backlash amongst non-blacks. Black racism fatigue is real, and the left is making it impossible to root out real racism by yelling racist every time they “feel” offended by a white person. Congresswoman Frederica Wilson (D-FL) is the latest to claim White House Chief-of-Staff, Gen. John Kelly, used a racial slur when he implied she was an “empty barrel.” Nonsense! Outlandish accusations like that do nothing to stop racism or improve race-relations. To the contrary, unfounded racial assertions needlessly reopen old wounds by turning all whites into enemies without evidence or warrant.

Consider the fact that over 70 percent of NFL players are black, yet former 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick recently filed a grievance lawsuit against NFL owners for collusion to keep him out of the league. Furthermore, ESPN’s Michael Wilbon, claimed Dallas Cowboys owner, Jerry Jones, was acting with a “plantation mentality” by saying if his players (employees) kneel during the national anthem, they’ll be benched. Sorry Mr. Wilbon, slaves never averaged $1.9 million annual salaries for playing a game they loved. What an insult to our ancestors! Americans of all political stripes are fed up with haughty liberals judging their heart and intentions based on skin color alone. Now, that’s racist!

Actor and comedian George Lopez recently went on a profanity-laced tirade aimed at a group of black women attending his show who stood up to give him the middle finger. Why did they do it? The ladies were offended Mr. Lopez told a joke about why Mexicans don’t date blacks and don’t allow people to park in front of their homes. Ultimately, the ladies were removed from the comedy show.

Furthermore, The Daily Wire reported Joe Rogan, UFC commentator and host of the podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience, went ballistic after hearing white girls who wear hoop earrings are engaging in a fad that’s a "racist" "appropriation of Latina Culture." Rogan said "the entire country is a melting pot of cultural appropriation, you dumb c***s! That’s the whole idea of having a civilization, it’s that you get to share each other’s food, share each other’s recipes, listen to each other’s jokes and stories, buy each other’s clothes." Joe Rogan gets our motto, e pluribus unum – “from many one.”

Why do you think the left invented terms like "institutional racism?" For two reasons: they can't be proved or dismissed. It's a perpetual talking-point for left-wing Democrats to campaign on in order to secure the black vote. Sadly, far too many Millennials, minorities and otherwise, have bought into the lie that America is a racist nation. Despite the fact they're free to live out their dreams regardless of their skin color. In other words, they've inherited a largely racist free America due to battles our ancestors have already fought. As I've written before, a lot of these kids are empty shells looking for purpose in a world that's given them too much.

The word “racist” has and continues to lose its power because it’s lost its meaning. Prior to President Barack Obama, the word racist meant you were a person who believed by nature your race is superior to others, and you discriminated based on that belief according to the Webster’s Dictionary. Today, the word racist simply means you disagree with Democrats, the political party that founded the Ku Klux Klan.