Print Article

BELOIT - Milwaukee County Circuit Court Judge Rebecca F. Dallet looks to contend for a seat on the Wisconsin Supreme Court, bringing with her years of criminal justice experience as she heads into February's primary race.

Dallet, 48, who announced her candidacy in June, has sought to represent a middle ground as a moderate between the two other challengers, liberal-backed Madison attorney Tim Burns and conservative-supported Sauk County Judge Michael Screnock. The three will compete in the primary election, seeking the seat currently held by retiring Justice Michael Gableman.

Dallet said if elected she would encourage the state's highest court to take another look at a recusal rule for justices and boost transparency of all court administrative hearings, while fighting for individual protections of state residents.

"I have spent my career fighting for those rights," Dallet said. "They are at risk right now. We need a person with the most experience to be the next Supreme Court justice."

The highly controversial debate surrounding the partisan drawing of state legislative district maps is a key issue going forward, Dallet said. The redistricting debate was central to how voters in the state have their voices heard, she added.

"It's something we should all care about," Dallet said. "We should care because it's about the people in power trying to stay in power and it could be both parties, but either way we should all want to have a fair say. Gerrymandering shows that it doesn't."

Dallet said she believed the state's highest court "got it wrong" in terms of the controversial Act 10 policy pushed by Gov. Scott Walker, with Dallet speculating the court didn't look at the heart of the issue related to the sweeping policy.

"The court didn't look at whether or not Act 10 violated the right to association," she said. "It didn't even analyze it under that framework."

Implementing a recusal rule to govern whether presiding judges can hear cases involving parties who contributed to their campaign would help restore trust in the court system, Dallet said.

"When you have that kind of influence of special interest money, it makes the courts appear not to be fair," Dallet said. "I think the public has lost trust in the courts."

At a county level, the longtime prosecutor and circuit court judge said the implementation of Evidence Based Decision Making protocols in the state justice system are important, providing more information for court commissioners along the way. Rock County recently funded initial stages of the system's implementation for the court system, which will see new standards put in place over the next few years.

"It's a good place to start, it gives us a lot of data," Dallet said. "But that doesn't take away the ability to exercise discretion."

She said current conversations nationwide related to sexual assault and workplace discrimination translate to an important moment in time for American women.

"It's important for women to feel empowered to speak up right now," Dallet said.

The mother of three was one of the first judges in the state to hear human trafficking cases in 2009. Dallet also teaches domestic violence case issues.

Dallet is endorsed by 170 judges and 300 elected officials across the state.

She has worked as Special Assistant U.S. Attorney in the state's eastern district and previously served as an adjunct professor at Marquette University Law School.

The longtime judge and Ohio native earned her law degree from Case Western University in Cleveland before moving to Wisconsin with her husband in the mid-90s.

For more on Dallet, visit dalletforjustice.com.