Google Summer of Code Doc Camp - a partnership of GSoC, Aspiration and FLOSS ManualsThis is a call for proposals for the 2013 GSoC Doc Camp. Individuals and projects are invited to submit proposals for the GSoC Doc Camp to be held at Google's Mountain View headquarters in California from October 14 - October 18.What is it?The GSoC Doc Camp is a place for free software communities to meet, work on creating a book for their project, attract new people to their efforts, and share their documentation experiences. The camp aims to improve free documentation materials and skills in free software projects and individuals and help form the identity of the emergent free documentation sector.The Doc Camp will consist of 2 major components - an unconference and 2-4 short (3 day) Book Sprints to produce books for the selected projects.The unconference will explore topics proposed by the participants. Any topic on free documentation of free software can be proposed for discussion during the event.Each Book Sprint will bring together 4-5 individuals to produce a book on a specific free software project. All participants of the Doc Camp must attend a sprint. The books will be launched online in print and ebook formats on the final day of the event.Who should come?Individuals and free software projects can apply. All individuals will be required to work on one of the selected projects to assist their documentation efforts.How to I get involved?Individuals with a passion for free documentation about free software may apply to attend by filling out the application form [1] and submitting before August 7. Those wishing to attend do not need to be from a GSoC project. Accommodation and food will be covered by the GSoC Doc Camp. Partial or complete travel costs can also be applied for as part of the application process.Free software projects of any sort can also apply - they do not need to be GSoC 2013 projects although these may be given preference.Projects will be chosen from proposals submitted to the GSoC Doc Camp before August 7 through the application form [2]. Project applications can nominate up to 5 individuals to attend and participate in the proposed sprint. A Project proposal does not have to nominate individuals to participate - you can also use this as an opportunity to promote your project to Doc Camp participants and extend your documentation community. If the proposal is accepted the accommodation and food costs will be covered by the Doc Camp for any listed individuals and part or complete travel costs for each can be applied for (if applicable).The 2013 GSoC Doc Camp is co-organized by GSoC, Aspiration and FLOSS Manuals. Unconference facilitation conducted by Allen Gunn, and Book Sprint facilitated by Adam Hyde.APPLY HERE: