Kolhapur: AYUSH minister Shripad Yesso Naik on Saturday said doctors prescribing non-ayurvedic medicines are "anti-nationals"."Some ayurveda practitioners have told me that doctors prescribing allopathy medicines often advise patients not to opt for ayurveda. Such doctors are anti-nationals," said Naik, who was in the city for the inauguration of an ayurveda research centre."Ayurveda is one of the oldest medical systems in the world and we should be proud of it. How can anyone oppose ayurveda when the whole world is showing interest in it and trying to find remedies of diseases that modern medical science cannot?" Naik said."Kolhapur is home to many plant species with medicinal properties. Our ministry will explore the potential of these plants. There is a need for research on the flora in this region," he added.On the syllabus and teaching methods of ayurveda, the minister said, "We will ensure that the medium of education for ayurveda students is Sanskrit. All literature related to ayurveda are in Sanskrit."Naik said the ministry of yoga and traditional medicine will sign a memorandum of understanding with the World Health Organisation in June to make ayurveda popular across the world. "A recognition on such an international platform will help propagate ayurveda across the world. We are also trying to find ways to tackle various types of cancers through ayurveda," the AYUSH minister said.The department of AYUSH focuses on development of education and research in ayurveda, yoga and naturopathy, unani, siddha and homeopathy systems.Kolhapur: Union minister for yoga and traditional medicines Shripad Yesso Naik on Saturday said doctors prescribing non-ayurvedic medicines are "anti-nationals"."Some ayurvedic practitioners have told me that doctors prescribing allopathic medicines advise patients not to opt for ayurveda. Such doctors are anti-nationals," he said, while addressing the inauguration ceremony of an ayurveda research centre here."Ayurveda is one of the oldest medical systems in the world and we should be proud of it as it has been practised since anctient times. How can anyone oppose it when the whole world is showing interest in ayurveda and trying to find remedies of diseases that even modern medical science cannot discover?" Naik asked."Kolhapur is home to several plant species with medicinal properties. Our ministry will explore the potential of these plants. There is a need for research on the flora in this region," he said.On the syllabus and teaching methods of ayurveda, the minister said, "We will ensure that the medium of education for ayurveda students will be Sanskrit. All literature related to ayurveda are in Sanskrit."Naik said the ministry of yoga and traditional medicine will sign a memorandum of understanding with the World Health Organisation in June to make ayurveda popular across the world."A recognition on such an international platform will help propagate ayurveda across the world. We are also trying to find ways to tackle various types of cancers through ayurveda," he said.The department of AYUSH focuses attention to development of education and research in Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy systems.