First, the British people rose up and voted to leave the European Union, defying their prime minister and the forces of globalism. Then the American people voted to make Donald Trump their president, defying a sneering media and skeptical international community.

Now the Italian people have voted to reject changes to their constitution, siding with the populist Five Star Movement against international-minded Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, a fan of Barack Obama and the Clintons.

WND senior staff writer Jerome Corsi hailed Sunday’s referendum as another victory for national sovereignty.

“The Italian referendum, coming on top of the Brexit vote in the U.K. and the victory of Donald Trump in the U.S. presidential election, affirms the rise of nationalism in reaction to the godless New World Order globalism of forces represented by the European Union, the Trans-Pacific Partnership and George Soros,” said Corsi, the author of many books, including “The Late Great USA” and “Partners in Crime.” “Far-left socialists have been dealt a severe blow by the ‘silent majorities’ in the United State and Europe who believe in jobs, families and traditional Judeo-Christian values.”

Now that the Italians have rejected Renzi and his proposed reforms, Corsi foresees the potential breakup of the E.U. and the demise of the euro. So does Theodore Roosevelt Malloch, the chairman and CEO of the Roosevelt group.

“Italy has gone populist and the ‘No’ vote signals the bouncing of the Brexit ball,” said Malloch, who recounted his experiences in business and diplomacy in his book, “Davos, Aspen, and Yale: My Life Behind the Elite Curtain as a Global Sherpa.” “It means the government will fall and a new election will usher in the Five Star Movement, eventually to the demise of the E.U.

“Already, we see a big falloff in the value of the euro, which will drop further until it collapses altogether. The power of anti-globalism and Euroscepticism is unabated and will next travel to the Netherlands, France and Sweden.”

International journalist and educator Alex Newman also believes the Italian vote dealt a blow to the new global order that many world leaders wish to usher in.

“The referendum result in Italy, while not as dramatic or significant, was similar in many ways to the historic Brexit vote to leave the EU,” Newman told WND. “In addition to bold defiance of the internationalist fanatics in Brussels and beyond, both results dealt a stunning blow to the claims of globalist inevitability that the establishment has been pushing for years. The vote showed once again that not only is globalism not inevitable, it is unpopular with the people, no matter how much fear-mongering is deployed.”

Newman, author of “Crimes of the Educators: How Utopians are Using Government Schools to Destroy America’s Children,” noted the huge margin of defeat– 59 percent voted against the proposed reforms while 40 percent voted in favor – makes the vote even more significant.

“Hopefully this vote, like Brexit and the Trump victory before it, is a sign of things to come as Europeans – like Americans – increasingly wake up to the mass deception being perpetrated by the establishment,” Newman said.

Carl Gallups, a nationally known Baptist pastor and radio host, views Italy’s referendum in a prophetic context.

“Certainly there must be prophetic implications to the amazing and unprecedented ‘political shaking’ that is currently stirring among the global superpowers of Europe and the United States,” said Gallups, author of “When the Lion Roars: Understanding the Implications of Ancient Prophecies For Our Time.” “I am convinced we are living in the most profoundly prophetic times since the first coming of Yeshua/Jesus – with the last decade or so ushering in the lion’s share of biblical last days’ prophecy fulfillments.”

Extraordinary events predicted centuries in advance are unfolding now. Here is your guide to the incredible prophecies being fulfilled before our very eyes. Don’t miss the bestselling sensation from one of America’s most prolific and beloved pastors. “When the Lion Roars: Understanding the Implications of Ancient Prophecies for Our Time” by Carl Gallups, available now in the WND Superstore.

While Gallups does not claim to know the exact prophetic shakeout of the Italian referendum, he noted the similarities to Brexit and Trump’s election.

“All of these votes represent a rising ‘populace’ and ‘protectionist’ uprising. The stated objectives of Italy’s no vote and Donald Trump’s campaign promises (neither having a direct connection to Brexit) were to protect the standing constitutions of the two nations as well as promising to bolster national sovereignty against the rising tide of the elitist and globalist agenda.”

He continued: “What is interesting about Italy’s no vote, the latest in a trifecta of political-uprising surprises, is that a large number of prophecy experts have long considered Italy as being a major player in the last days’ ‘one world government’ system as prophesied in Daniel 7-9 and Revelation 17. While all of this ultimately remains to be seen, it is certainly no understatement to declare that we are living in exciting as well as potentially precarious times.”

The reforms would have changed the Italian constitution to remove power from the Senate so that proposed laws would only require the approval of Italy’s lower house of parliament, as opposed to the current system that requires approval from both houses. The Senate also would have been slashed from 315 directly elected members to 100 members, mostly nominated by the regions. Critics said this would have created a parliament full of bureaucrats appointed by their parties, with less accountability to the people they would serve.

Newman noted the referendum represented a blow to big government in general.

“Like in the United States, the Italian Constitution makes it somewhat difficult to pass legislation,” he said. “And while proponents of big government may decry that as ‘inefficient,’ they start from the absurd assumption that more legislation – essentially more restrictions on liberty – is desirable. In fact, as the Founders of the United States understood, gridlock in government is a good thing. So the defeat of the socialist-backed ‘reforms’ is good news for Italy, the West and liberty.”

Corsi holds onto a similar hope that the vote in Italy will portend a rollback of the leftist tide in America.

“The Democratic Party in the United States after the impact of Saul Alinsky acolytes Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton is reduced to the status of a fringe party popular only among the elites who populate East Coast and West Coast large cities. We are experiencing a transformational moment in world history that offers hope God will not be banned from the city square, that radical Islamic terrorists will be defeated, and the atheists on the Supreme Court will be replaced by jurists understanding the Founding Fathers meant for the Constitution to be interpreted as written.”

The Italian vote came just two days after President-elect Trump took a congratulatory phone call from the president of Taiwan, which many observers interpreted as a signal of support for Taiwan’s national sovereignty. China views Taiwan as a breakaway province that will be reunited with China in the future.

But Taiwan elected a president, Chen Shuiban, in 2000 who openly backed independence from China. The Taiwanese people re-elected him in 2004. China reacted by passing an anti-secession law in 2005, claiming it has the right to use “non-peaceful means” against Taiwan if the island asserts its independence. The current president, Tsai Ing-wen, leads the Democratic Progressive Party, which says Taiwan is a sovereign state. Taiwan now has a constitution, democratically elected leaders and its own armed forces consisting of 300,000 active troops.

Extraordinary events predicted centuries in advance are unfolding now. Here is your guide to the incredible prophecies being fulfilled before our very eyes. Don’t miss the bestselling sensation from one of America’s most prolific and beloved pastors. “When the Lion Roars: Understanding the Implications of Ancient Prophecies for Our Time” by Carl Gallups, available now in the WND Superstore.