A young woman named Amy recently enjoyed a relaxing day in the Pensacola area. She took a walk on the beach, read a book in the sand, snapped pictures of her friends at Fort Pickens, and took a lazy canoe ride. She had a glass of wine with her dinner and went out to a bar with some friends. For most people, the total cost of the day’s activities might be a hundred dollars or two. Amy, however, rang up a bill of over $270,000.

Amy’s day out was chronicled in a commercial for Visit Pensacola produced by Nashville-based BOHAN Advertising, which won a three-year contract last June to handle the area’s marketing. The marketing budget, which combines the resources of Visit Pensacola, the Perdido Key Chamber of Commerce and the Pensacola Sports Association, totals $5.7 million for the current fiscal year and is funded primarily by bed tax revenue.

“This unified marketing program is really good for us,” BOHAN’s Brian Kilpatrick told the Pensacola City Council in March, “and it’s more important now than ever so that we can compete in a very crowded marketplace.” He said their research had indicated the area’s combination of scenic beauty and unique offerings was “a space we could own.”

After months of development, BOHAN launched the tourism campaign last month with the tagline, “Loved by Explorers. Since 1559.” The campaign’s 30-second TV commercial (“Pensacola. Explored by Amy.”) is embedded below, and it’s a great ad by all accounts.

Liz Watkins, a veteran video producer and owner of the local company Watkins Productions, has been a vocal critic of decisions to hire outside companies like BOHAN and the Zimmerman Agency to market Pensacola.

“Locals should always be employed,” Watkins said. “Not just in production — an out-of-town contractor built the ballpark on the water. The mayor and chamber keep trying to attract big business, but when we hire out-of-town companies to do our local work, what does that say?”

She was curious how much Visit Pensacola spent on the ad, so she made a public records request. What she found was startling. Steve Hayes, who was hired earlier this year to lead Visit Pensacola, had approved an April estimate of $258,094.76 for the ad’s production with the following cost breakdown:

Travel Time: $3,500.00

Project Supervision: $13,800.00

Art Direction: $18,450.00

Creative Direction: $21,300.00

Production Management: $3,450.00

Video Broadcast Producer: $14,750.00

Travel Expenses: $7,204.00

Color Outputs & Supplies: $200.00

Shipping/Deliveries/Postage: $200.00

Audio Production/Sound Design: $6,117.80

Video Production Company: $122,357.08

Talent – TV: $15,882.75

Post Production: $29,647.80

Station Uploads: $1,235.33

There was also a rain day which added $12,763 to the bill. (WALA had previously reported that the cost of the rain day was $30,000.) The total, $270,857, is an order of magnitude higher than any TV commercial ever previously produced for Visit Pensacola.

“The work and the numbers do not add up,” Watkins said. She pointed to a 2011 commercial produced by local firms E.W. Bullock Associates and Florida Production Group, which had a budget of around $20,000 and included original music. “That spot is the message we want around the world to attract visitors.”

Local video producer David Rakoczy, owner of Emerald Coast Filmworks, was hired as a gaffer for the ad, and two of his crew were hired as grips. They were far from the only crew on set.

“They flew in people from all over the country and Canada,” Rakoczy said. “It was really out of line and very strange.”

Rakoczy had a career in Hollywood before moving back to the area, and like Watkins, he was disappointed there wasn’t more of an effort to have the whole production done locally.

“I was very surprised that our own tourism board didn’t do its due diligence to see we actually have some good shooters here,” he said. “For us locals, it was a real slap in the face.”

The Pensacola News Journal disagrees. An editorial (“If you buy cheap…”) defended the production cost:



Local advertising firms can complain all they want about how the money is being spent, but [BOHAN] is the company hired to promote this area. Is there better local talent? Not in the eyes of the chamber officials who sought expertise outside the area. … Too often critics in this area get wrapped up in the costs of things and we wind up settling for mediocre people, half-baked results and a second-rate quality of life.

The PNJ has had its own share of cost-cutting measures in recent years (reducing staff, outsourcing printing to Mobile, designing the paper remotely from Nashville, etc.) so perhaps they have some insight into how those efforts can affect quality.

How expensive is $270,000 for an ad? It’s not unusual for national TV commercials to cost several hundreds of thousands or even millions of dollars — the cost of “running with the big dogs,” as one UCF marketing professor told the PNJ‘s Nate Monroe — but those costs are incurred by specific aspects of production: celebrity actors, expensive sets and sound stages, special effects and animations, etc. Except for a brief shot of computer-generated Blue Angels, the “Amy” ad doesn’t seem to have any of those. Even the lighting was mostly natural or ambient light.

“There was no lighting, there was no nothing,” Rakoczy said. He added that the weather conditions weren’t ideal for filming, but the expense of bringing in an outside production company meant they couldn’t postpone the shoot for a week. “The surf was pounding, it’s double red flag conditions, and they’re shooting people walking on the beach. We could’ve waited around to get it right and saved them 200 grand.”

As a point of reference, the TV show Game of Thrones has an estimated budget of $70 million per ten-episode season. At around 55 minutes per episode, that works out to about $64,000 per 30 seconds of finished video. So even with dozens of scripted characters, hundreds of extras, and film crews working across three continents, it’s still four times cheaper to produce Game of Thrones (per unit of time) than a Visit Pensacola TV commercial.

The production budget is also usually related to the placement budget, i.e. the money spent to run an ad on television. It can cost well over $100,000 to place a single ad on a primetime network show, and many national ad campaigns have multi-million dollar budgets accordingly. When General Mills spends $835 million a year on television ads, they probably don’t worry too much about the cost of production, because it represents only a tiny fraction of their total budget. Visit Pensacola, however, has a much more modest budget for TV placement — about $490,000, according to WEAR. The means the $270,000 production cost is about 36% of the total TV budget.

Another problem with spending that much on a single ad: there’s not enough money to make more than one. As a result, poor “Amy” is forced to appeal to all of Pensacola’s prospective visitor demographics. Most of the shots in the ad clearly establish Amy as a twenty-something who hangs out with other twenty-somethings, but then there’s an inexplicable shot of her frolicking in the sand with two elementary school-aged children. This shot was included, no doubt, so that the people at BOHAN could tick the “families” box on their demographic checklist, but wouldn’t it have been better to make a whole campaign of ads that each appealed to a specific audience?

Ultimately, only time will tell if the cost of the ad is justified by its results. If nothing else, we can use it as an example of what generous hospitality Pensacola shows to our out-of-town guests. Hey, maybe that could be a marketing campaign.