The official website of the online anime adaptation of Kurose's Momokuri manga revealed on Sunday that the series is getting a television broadcast that will premiere on Tokyo MX on July 1 at 10:30 p.m., and on BS11 on July 1 at 24:30 (effectively 12:30 a.m. on July 2).

The comico app's YouTube channel also began streaming a TV ad and a third promotional video for the series on Sunday.

Additionally, comico also began streaming two ads on Sunday for the show's DVD and Blu-ray Disc box releases on August 26.

Norika Version



Kurihara Version



The website also revealed that the comico manga app has surpassed 12 million downloads. The story of the manga revolves around Yuki Kurihara, a girl who has finally been granted her wish of dating her crush Shinya Momotsuki (Momo). At first glance, she just looks like a normal but very cute girl. However, she is in fact a maniac over Momo, taking notes of his activities and never missing the chance to see him in a cute moment. Momo, on the other hand, is inexperienced in love, and just wants to make Yuki happy.

The anime's cast includes:

Ai Kakuma as Yuki Kurihara

Nobuhiko Okamoto as Shinya Momotsuki

Naomi Ōzora as Norika Mizuyama

Rena Maeda as Rio Sakaki

Sayaka Nakaya as Yuzuki Shimada

Reina Takeshita as Ikue Usami

Yoshitaka Yamaya as Rihito Sawaguchi

Takuma Nagatsuka as Shōta Shizuka

Kensho Ono as Seiichiro Usami

Yasuaki Takumi as Ema Sawaguchi

The anime's first episode was available for free on December 24 alongside the first episode of the radio show on the Comico app. The second episode was distributed similarly through the app on January 7. The show's third episode onward streamed exclusively on the "Momokuri channel" app starting when the app launched in February.

Yoshimasa Hiraike (Amagami SS, Kaleido Star: New Wings , AKB0048) directed and and headed series composition for the anime at animation studio Satelight (Macross Frontier, The Disappearance of Nagato Yuki-chan) with producer Fumio Kaneko (AKB0048, Log Horizon) also on the project. Miwa Oshima (Baka and Test - Summon the Beasts, GJ-bu ) designed the characters and served as chief animation director. TO-MAS SOUNDSIGHT FLUORESCENT FOREST, the musical unit that includes Masumi Itou, Mito, and Yohei Matsui, composed the music for the series. Lantis produced the music.

Kurose began the manga on the Comico free manga app in January 2014. Crunchyroll is releasing the manga digitally in English.