Clearly, however, lion-think prevails, because wind-think is so unsatisfying. Mundane and probably correct explanations for events like birds falling from the sky leave us emotionally unconvinced and yearning for something more.

What really did in the birds?

Melanie Driscoll, a biologist and director of bird conservation for the Gulf of Mexico and Mississippi Flyway for the National Audubon Society, said preliminary tests showed no evidence of viral or bacterial disease, toxins or poisons, but there were reasonable explanations.

“In Arkansas, we have eyewitness accounts that professional-grade fireworks were set off in a town near a known blackbird roost,” she said, “and that birds flushed from the roost and flew in a single direction at lower levels than they would normally fly. We know that they cannot see well in the dark and we know they were seen crashing into buildings and cars and poles. Necropsies show blunt force trauma to brain and breast.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As for the hundreds of red-winged blackbirds found dead in Pointe Coupee Parish, La., a few hundred miles from the Arkansas die-off site, they were found along rural roads under power lines, which are thin and difficult to see at night. The theory is that those birds were also spooked by holiday fireworks, and ran into the lines.

It’s worth keeping in mind just how many birds there are when thinking about so-called mass die-offs. “Five billion birds die in the U.S. every year,” Ms. Driscoll said, “so statistically some have to die at the same time.” The population of red-winged blackbirds is more than 200 million, she said, and they fly in flocks of 100,000 to 2 million. “So 5,000 sounds like a lot of birds, but really it is a relative number.”

All of this makes sense, and yet leaves us craving something more. We hear the numbers. We recognize the rationality of Ms. Driscoll’s explanation and yet, some of us think, birds falling from the sky? There must be something else going on.

Me, I’m betting on zombies. Has anyone checked to see if any dead birds are coming back to life? It may sound silly, but imagine the downside of missing the first signs of a zombie epidemic. Human beings would become walking bird feeders for the beaked undead.

Not a pretty thought. Not a possibility to ignore, if you have a lion turn of mind.

Of course, it’s probably just the wind.