Ross Barkley has torn a hamstring and needs an operation which will keep him out for three months — and could scupper a move to Tottenham Hotspur.

The Everton midfielder, strongly linked with a move to the north London club, was injured in a training session earlier this month and, as revealed by Sportsmail on Wednesday, was set for at least a six-week lay-off.

On Wednesday, Toffees manager Ronald Koeman said that Barkley needed more tests to determine the extent of the injury. But it is understood that an operation will be recommended.

Ross Barkley looks to need surgery on his hamstring injury to potentially scupper any move

Barkley has attracted the interest of Tottenham and has just one year left on his Everton deal

Going under the knife would put Barkley out for three months, and is likely to jeopardise any move away from Goodison Park before the transfer window closes at the end of the month.

Barkley has one year left on his contract and so far has refused to sign a new deal with the club.

He went down clutching a leg during a training session and had to be helped from the field.

'He stopped training last Monday, it looks like the hamstring,' Koeman said. 'But we need to do more tests to know exactly what the injury is.'

Speaking ahead of the club's Europa League play-off first leg against Hajduk Split on Thursday night, Koeman added there was 'no update' on speculation regarding Barkley's future. 'I will wait until the end of August,' he added.

Koeman said last week that no offers had been lodged for the player and did not rule out his staying at Everton.

Mauricio Pochettino is keen on bringing Barkley to White Hart Lane in a transfer this summer

Meanwhile, Koeman has added £45m Gylfi Sigurdsson to Everton's ranks — and warned that he has not finished spending yet.

The manager has parted with around £135m in this window to bring the likes of Sigurdsson, Michael Keane and Jordan Pickford to Goodison Park.

Playmaker Sigurdsson, 27, arrives on Merseyside after a stunning campaign at Swansea City last year.

Gylfi Sigurdsson poses for photos after finally sealing his £45million move from Swansea City

The fee is a club record, and Koeman admitted that with it comes pressure on both player and manager.

'Of course,' he said. 'It's always about spending money, and with that comes more pressure.'

The visit of the Croatians will come too soon for Sigurdsson, and Koeman said: 'He needs game time. Maybe we will give him that in the coming weeks.'