FAYETTEVILLE - Eleven days to Southeastern Conference Media Days. Eleven games left to look at on the Arkansas football schedule.

FAYETTEVILLE - Eleven days to Southeastern Conference Media Days. Eleven games left to look at on the Arkansas football schedule.

Each day from now until July 12, the first day of SEC Media Days, Arkansas News Bureau takes a statistical and positional look at look at each of the 12 regular-season football opponents for Arkansas in the 2016 season. The series began with the Razorbacks’ first opponent, Louisiana Tech yesterday.

And, for the curious, we have projections for how the season will shake out. AKA: What I have Arkansas finishing, record-wise.

Here is opponent No. 2.

Texas Christian Horned Frogs

Big 12

Last Year: 11-2, 7-2 in Big 12 (tied for second), beat Oregon in the Alamo Bowl

Plays Arkansas: September 10, 7 p.m., at Amon G. Carter Stadium in Fort Worth, Texas

By the Numbers

Scoring offense: 42.1 points per game (7th out of 128 teams in FBS)

Passing offense: 347.5 yards per game (8th)

Rushing offense: 215.38 yards per game (24th)

Scoring defense: 27.2 points per game (64th)

Passing defense: 215.8 yards allowed per game (56th)

Rushing defense: 182.61 yards allowed per game (81st)

Offense

The first play of overtime, Texas A&M versus Arkansas in so-called Jerry’s World in 2014. Kenny Hill to Malcome Kennedy. Ball game. Arkansas fans don’t need any further description. Hill, the Aggies quarterback that day, is now at TCU (we’ll save the story of how he got there until September). And while he may have fallen out of favor in College Station, he is experienced and talented. And he has a wide-receiving corps as deep as Arkansas’ to whom he can throw the ball. Lots can be made of the Horned Frogs’ loss of Josh Doctson and his 79 grabs for 1,327 yards and 14 touchdowns. But seven of the team’s top nine pass-catchers are back.

That’s about where the experience ends, though. TCU has just three starters, technically, back on offense and only one on the offensive line, although the projected starters have been starters before but only lost out due to injury or a timeshare. Running back may be the biggest question mark offensively where TCU, again, looks a lot like Arkansas minus Devwah Whaley. There are a bunch of bodies back there and some with high potential and just enough of a past to be scary. But none of them have proven to be a No. 1 yet and Aaron Green’s 1,272 yards are going to be difficult to replace.

Defense

Eight starters are back. Two more who were starters but were lost for the season last year, are in the fold again, too. Another player was a starter two years ago, too, but redshirted last season. This TCU defense is a lot like the ones that made Gary Patterson the No. 1 (or No. 2) fan’s choice for the job Bret Bielema currently has the last time it was open. The TCU defensive numbers are a bit skewed because of the conference in which they play - the Big 12 is as gung ho offensively as any - but that’s not an excuse. They were not a great unit last year. Probably about the same as Arkansas, really, all things considered.

But there is talent everywhere with legitimate first-team All-Big 12 players on the line at linebacker and in the secondary. That last unit is going to be the one that needs to see the most improvement, and the one Arkansas will have to take most advantage of. It is the weakest link on paper and its best players are coming off injury (cornerback Ranthony Texada and safety Kenny Iloka).

Positional Edges

Quarterback - TCU

Running back - Arkansas

Receivers - Wash

Offensive line - Arkansas

Defensive line - Arkansas

Linebackers - TCU

Secondary - TCU

Special teams - Wash

Summary: Arkansas can beat TCU. It just isn’t likely. The talent is comparable across the board with no obvious strength countering an obvious weakness, especially on offense. Both groups of running backs lack experience. Both wide receiving corps’ are very solid. Both offensive lines have real questions. But even with that there are simply too many things going the wrong direction for a Hogs win. TCU is a near-consensus top three finisher in the Big 12. Bielema teams typically struggle in the early season. TCU is at home. It might happen. It probably won’t.

Projected final score: TCU 24, Arkansas 17

Projected record so far: 1-1

Follow Eric on Twitter: @ericwbolin