Florida man who tossed alligator through drive-thu window ordered to stay away from Wendy's

Joshua James faces charges of aggravated assault and unlawful possession and transportation of an alligator after allegedly throwing an alligator into a Wendy's drive-through. Joshua James faces charges of aggravated assault and unlawful possession and transportation of an alligator after allegedly throwing an alligator into a Wendy's drive-through. Image 1 of / 42 Caption Close Florida man who tossed alligator through drive-thu window ordered to stay away from Wendy's 1 / 42 Back to Gallery

The Florida man who tossed an alligator into a Palm Beach Wendy’s drive-thru in what he said was intended to be “prank” has been ordered to stay away from all of the businesses’ locations and animals until his case – which includes a charge of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon – is finalized, according to media reports.

On Oct. 11, 2015, Joshua James allegedly threw a 3-and-a-half foot gator through the drive-thru window after receiving his drink order, according to WPBF. He was arrested in February by U.S. Marshals and now faces charges of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon and unlawful possession and transportation of an alligator, according to WFLX.

RELATED: Florida man accused of tossing gator into Wendy's drive-thru

According to WPBF, the attorney of “gator boy” maintained the incident was a prank during his initial appearance. James agreed to an open plea and will be sentenced on May 31, the site reported.

Upon his release from jail in February, he told reporters he didn’t mean to harm anyone and the incident was “just purely prankster stupidity.”

RELATED: Florida attorney disbarred after admitting rampant illegal drug use, phone sex with jailed clients

“It’s definitely going to be the last of anything I do, just because I figured out ‘like wow, I’m really in trouble for this, so I think my pranking days are over as of today,” he told media. “[...] I definitely don’t recommend doing it, like I said – this is probably the last time I’m going to do this.”

RELATED: No jail time for Florida woman who livestreamed her drunken drive

Though James told reporters the stunt was a joke, he understands that his possible charges are not and is “definitely scared” of them.

The crew was later able to get a hold of the reptile after the drive-thru employee spotted it and jumped onto the counter window. They closed its mouth with tape and then released it in a nearby canal, according to WPBF.

RELATED: Rare sight meets kayakers on on upper Guadalupe River as alligator angles toward the riverbank

Before winding up on the Wendy’s kitchen floor, James told media it was “just hanging out” in the backseat of his truck.

mmendoza@mysa.com

Twitter: @MaddySkye