Get the biggest Liverpool FC stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Hey, have we found a new name here? I certainly haven't seen him on this page before. And I spent at least three minutes checking.

Jeremy Menez is the man, with the Express suggesting the AC Milan forward has emerged as a fresh target for Liverpool FC.

He's got game, too, has the Frenchman. Having moved to Milan from Paris Saint-Germain last summer, he scored 16 goals in 33 Serie A games, despite playing in a side that is sinking down the Italian league fast.

The rumours say he could be available for as little as £10.5m, due to the arrivals of Luiz Adriano and Carlos Bacca, whose names I definitely HAVE seen on this page before.

And with Liverpool's pursuit of Christian Benteke running into turbulent waters, a new striking target may be just what the Reds need.

More Liverpool FC news today

Liverpool FC news and transfer rumours LIVE: Rodgers and Lallana to meet press in Brisbane, Mignolet on Origi, Benteke latest

Mignolet hails Liverpool new boy Origi - but won't be drawn on Benteke

Joe Allen: The players let down Liverpool FC boss Brendan Rodgers last season

How Liverpool FC's balance sheet looks after Raheem Sterling sale

How about Salomon Rondon , then?

Earmarked as an alternative to Benteke earlier in the summer, it has been pretty quiet on the Venezuelan of late.

Until now, that is!

Well, kind of, anyway. A report in the Metro suggests that Liverpool could be about to rekindle their interest in the Zenit St Petersburg forward, and that, in fact, an offer has already been made for the 25-year-old.

Roma are also said to be interested, though. How do you spell 'gazump'?

And finally, a blast from the recent past, with suggestions that Aly Cissokho could be on the move again, this time to Italy.

Fiorentina are said to be interested in signing the former Reds full back, who has found opportunities limited at Aston Villa under Tim Sherwood.

In pictures: The players linked with Liverpool FC this summer