Jorven Seren has been jailed for 15 months (Picture: National)

A 55-year-old sex offender sucked his thumb throughout a court hearing after his doll was taken off him.

Jorven Seren appeared before a judge after he forced himself on a girl outside a shop, kissing her in front of her mother.

He was arrested after people from a nearby church in Thanet, Kent, spotted the attack and contacted police.

Record-breaking February heatwave to continue today and it could be even warmer

They found more than 460 images of child abuse on his phone which he says were there after being persuaded to download them by a paedophile who has since died.

In court, Seren asked to be referred to as a woman and held the doll in his arms.

Judge Williams said: ‘That is totally inappropriate and I make it plain she will not be doing that for the rest of the hearing.’

Advertisement

Advertisement

In April last year members of a church had contacted officers after becoming concerned about Seren’s behaviour towards children.

Sometime later the victim’s mother saw Seren trying to get the attention of her very young child and later saw her child being kissed on the lips.

The mother later described it as ‘a prolonged peck’ and immediately took the child away after becoming ‘deeply shocked’ by the incident.

Police had a meeting with Seren and noted ‘some items of concern’ in his home.

In July last year Seren was arrested and officers found the images on his computer which he claimed had been downloaded by a man known to police as a paedophile.

Paul Hogben defending Seren said: ‘I am sure looking at this defendant and the offences which she has admitted there is a great deal of concern.

‘There are no mental health issues but there are personality disorders. Miss Seren was born a man but since an early age felt she is more a woman than a man.’

Seren had pleaded guilty to indecent assault and downloading illegal child sex images.

The court heard how Seren thinks he is a five-year-old girl and is regarded as ‘highly vulnerable’.

Although psychiatrists concluded the defendant has personality problems he did not have any mental illness and he was jailed him for a total of 15 months.

Judge Williams told him: ‘I know it will be difficult for you to serve a custodial sentence but I have a duty to protect the public and especially young children.’