The Amazon Princess got off to a solid start in the world's second-biggest moviegoing market yesterday. Wonder Woman is launching in 55 territories over the weekend, along with its North American debut, and of course, the big one is China right off the bat. The Gal Gadot vehicle, the first female-led comic book superhero movie in a generation, earned a decent $12 million on its first Friday, including online ticketing fees. That includes $540,000 in midnight showings and, combined with the early Wednesday previews ($370k).

At a glance, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice earned a whopping $55.7 million on its Fri-Sun debut back in March of 2016, from a $21.2m opening Friday (and a $1.35m midnight gross). A similar 2.62x weekend multiplier would give the Patty Jenkins adventure a $31.5m Fri-Sun launch. Of note, Fate of the Furious ($68m Friday/$184m weekend) had a similar 2.7x multiplier. Or, if we're being a little optimistic, we can note that Logan earned a $15.2m opening day three months ago for a $48.8m debut weekend, or a 3.2x multiplier.

Now the X-Men franchise certainly has a bigger fanbase in China than the comparatively recent DCEU series. Heck, Suicide Squad didn't even play in China while Batman v Superman was horrifically frontloaded, with a $95 million total from that $55m debut weekend. But, just for fun, if Wonder Woman plays like Logan then we're looking at a $38m debut weekend, right in line with Doctor Strange and Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them. At a glance, we should expect much more in terms of legs than the standard 2-2.2x weekend-to-final multiplier, since there is a new big movie every weekend in June.

China will open Universal/Comcast Corp.'s The Mummy next Friday, Alien: Covenant on the 16th and Transformers: The Last Knight on the 23rd, right alongside the domestic calendar (yes, T5 is opening on a Wednesday in North America, but you get the idea). And that's not even counting last weekend's Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge, which has thus far earned a whopping $117.5m in six days, or that obscenely leggy Dangal. This is a conversation for another day, but the more big Hollywood offerings China plays, the less special (and less leggy) each one is going to be.

But anyway, so far Wonder Woman is doing quite well, with an opening weekend that will almost certainly top the $25 million debut of Man of Steel back in 2013. It opened with $5.86m on its opening day, but that was a Thursday, so direct comparisons aren't entirely apples-to-oranges.