Walt Disney World, Universal Orlando and SeaWorld Entertainment will start distributing free insect repellent Sunday, as the threat of mosquito-borne Zika looms.

Fears have escalated about the virus, which is especially dangerous to pregnant women because it can affect fetal brains and cause babies to be born with unusually small heads. There have been more than 40 locally transmitted cases in Florida, including Miami Beach and Pinellas County.

Tourism experts and Gov. Rick Scott applauded the theme parks' move.

Scott spokeswoman Jackie Schutz said the governor has "talked to many of the attractions and theme parks. He's held multiple conference calls with Visit Florida and tourism leaders to make them aware of things they can do. He appreciates all of these businesses doing this."

Disney will offer free pump bottles and towelettes at its theme parks, Disney Springs and ESPN Wide World of Sports. Hotel rooms will have aerosol bug spray. Signs at the resort will inform visitors that repellent and protective clothing can help them avoid mosquito bites.

At Universal, visitors can obtain repellent—most likely in spray and pump form—at guest services locations. SeaWorld will provide it at its three Orlando theme and water parks, along with Busch Gardens and Adventure Island in Tampa.

The companies said they were providing the repellent "out of an abundance of caution." They stressed they already have extensive mosquito prevention and monitoring programs.

"Orlando is the gold standard of mosquito control efforts," Visit Orlando Chief Executive Officer George Aguel said in an email. "Both our government leaders and our tourism businesses are very serious about mosquito control." He called the theme parks' decision to provide repellent "just one more example of such measures."

Local efforts include grounds maintenance and ongoing elimination of standing water to prevent breeding, Aguel said.

Zika poses yet another problem for Central Florida's tourism industry. Theme park attendance and hotel occupancy has declined this year. Experts think a drop in Brazilian visitors, the Pulse mass shooting in June, and a lack of blockbuster attraction openings this year have all contributed.

Today.com ran a piece this weekend titled "How I told my kids we weren't going to Disney—because of Zika."

In Miami, travelers have booked fewer hotel rooms since Zika was detected there, Reuters reported.

spedicini@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5240