On a related note; I posted this on IGN the other day but here's one of my ideas for what I think Nintendo's NX could be:

Note: Be patient and read all the details—I promise there's some good stuff here—and let me know what you think.

First: Think of the NX as basically being the Wii U console stuffed directly into the current Wii U GamePad (either pretty much exactly the same power as a Wii U or a little bit more powerful if necessary). The main differences would be making the screen at least 1080p; 3D without glasses; adding multi-touch to the screen, which would work with both the stylus and multiple fingers; and possibly adding analog to the triggers (not the shoulder buttons; just the triggers). Everything else would pretty much stay the same. It still supports amiibos too. Oh; there'd also be a tiny dongle you can plug into your TV so you can play the games directly on the big screen too. That's basically the NX.

All the cool stuff is in the details however...

Right out the gate, you could basically emulate/play digital versions of old NES, SNES, N64, GC, GB, GBC and GBA games pretty much straight-up directly on the system, which you'd download and/or stream from the new connected service Nintendo is developing.

To run Wii games you'd download them like all the other games and for any of them that use full motion/pointer controls you would use a proper Wiimote by pointing it at the sensor bar and/or camera that's built into the NX (this is already built into the current GamePad and would be on NX too), and you could either stream the game to the TV or view it directly on the GamePad (a bit small and awkward but still possible). So for some Wii games you would need to own/buy actual Wiimotes but that's not really surprising. At least you don't have to own/plug-in a separate sensor bar.

For DS/3DS the 1080p screen would be used to recreate/mimic the two-screen DS/3DS setup directly on the NX screen and because of the size and resolution it would pretty much be just like looking at a normal size DS/3DS (regular; not XL/LL). The fact the NX screen would be both 3D without glasses and touch capable means it could mimic all aspect of the DS/3DS on that single screen. A lot of this would also be done in firmware/software, so it all displays correctly. If you want you could also stream the top screen to the TV, or use any other screen variation/setup that's currently available for running DS games on Wii U now. The 3D no-glasses could even be used to emulate the Virtual Boy system too

See how the 2DS screen in this image could basically fit into the current GamePad (both screens at once):

(With a screen that has a 1080p resolution, along with glasses free 3D, you could basically emulate a DS/3DS directly on the GamePad-esque NX no problem, but there would also be many other display configurations available to choose from too, as is already the case with current DS games running on the Wii U GamePad)

To run Wii U games it would simply do what the current Wii U and GamePad do; with the main game content being displayed on the TV, streamed via the dongle, and all the map and touch screen stuff or whatever on the NX screen. Obviously any games that have off-TV play could similarly be played just directly on the NX, like they are now when played directly on the Wii U GamePad.

The new NX would also be compatible directly with the current Wii U and could be used as a secondary GamePad (or third and forth too), which will be a feature that will be activated on Wii U via a firmware update that adds in all the new Nintendo network stuff, this whole "connected" system, and a few other things. Because the NX is obviously able to connect to other NX systems for multi-player games (say up to four at a time), you would also similarly be able to use up to three of them with the Wii U now too; allowing you to play four player games on Wii U, where one person uses the Wii U GamePad and three other people use NX systems, so each person could have a custom screen but at the same time the TV could display another view of the action. Think of a Madden type game where each player can call plays on their controller in secret by drawing on the screen, with the main action on the TV. Or something like 4 player local multi-player Splatoon, with each person playing on either the GamePad or an NX controller and the TV showing an overview of the map. Because the NX systems are basically self contained Wii U consoles, it wouldn't take much processing power for the main Wii U to handle a four player game like this (unlike now where it would basically be impossible to have 4 GamePads on Wii U), since each system is basically a Wii U in and of itself and would be doing its equal share of the leg work. The whole Wii U/NX/TV setup where you have three NX systems plus the Wii U is obviously a very rare scenario as most gamers would just use four NX systems for multi-player but for anyone that already owns a Wii U it means they can use it in place of another NX system, which is a nice bonus, and it means they now have the ability to play new multi-player games on Wii U where each person actually has a proper private screen (poker and Scrabble would be fun, with the cards or letters shown on the individual player's screens and the main deck or board shown on the TV).

Nintendo would now of course be able to make plenty of games that take advantage of more than just asymmetric local multi-player by default—these would just be regular multi-player portable games for NX, that allow you to link to other people online or near you with NX systems, but at the same time because the NX is in fact just a Wii U built into a GamePad, you could play those very same games as multi-player games on current Wii U, using the Wii U and the GamePad as one controller, with a private screen, and up to 3 NX systems as the other controllers with private screens.

NOW...as a little aside here, and something that I think would basically tip this over the edge and turn it from amazing into literally a literal revolution in the industry; I would build into every single NX system directly, in-the-box day one, a complete Creation Suite—which would be something like the old Mario Artist series for N64. This would allow people to use the NX controller and stylus/touchscreen directly to draw/paint art, including sprite/pixel are and textures for polygons; create music (a bit like Mario Paint's music mode); create animations; create/edit movies (using the camera etc); make polygon models; and even make full, albeit relatively simple, video games (anything from NES level up to N64 probably, and maybe even a bit beyond)—all for FREE and installed in every single new NX system out-the-box. All these creations could be shared among all NX users and even Wii U owners via Nintendo's new single connected service, and possibly 3DS owners in some cases—where those people could then play and enjoy them or modify them even further—as well as just shared to the general Internet and on sites like YouTube (if it's a video or animation you made). Just imagine all that content, some of it potentially brilliant, being made by users and available to other NX users from the get-go. This suite would also be added to the Wii U and 3DS too, via that firmware update I mentioned earlier; so it really is one complete unified and connected system/service that works across all Nintendo's main consoles:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NmW9Ipc2FhA (An example of one of the packages in the old Mario Artist series for N64—in this case Polygon Maker—for reference).

Now, imo, THAT's how you sell people on the idea of—a "controller with a touchscreen"—or in this case the NX.

So, "basically"; you have a single self-contained portable console, at least as powerful as a Wii U, that can play games from every single console Nintendo has ever made with very little hassle. For some of the more convoluted stuff, like Wii motion-centric games, you can basically use your old Wii controllers directly on it. It even works as an extra controller for anyone that has a Wii U too (up to three can be used, plus the GamePad as the forth). The connected internet service will work on NX but also be added to both Wii U and 3DS too (via a firmware update), so that all three systems now share many software/firmware and online features—this whole unified/connected system Nintendo has been going on about—such as using a single account for everything and for cross-play on many of the titles. Then the cherry on top is the entire creation suite built into the console from day one, out-the-box, and available for every single Wii U, NX and 3DS owner to use for free.

This system would be sold quite simply as Nintendo's brand new next-gen portable console, code named NX—although I'd call it something way cooler and funnier like the P-NES; Portable Nintendo Entertainment System. This is a great throwback to Nintendo's best name for a console ever (Nintendo Entertainment System or NES)—that describes what the console actually is better than any other console name its ever went with since—and it's also a funny play on the fact the original Wii name sounded like a penis/peeing. It's also just an accurate acronym of what the system is: A Portable Nintendo Entertainment System (not actually a portable version of the original NES however).

Going forwards—ignoring the kinda jokey PNES name for a second—I would actually call any new Nintendo console systems NES 2, NES 3, NES 4 and so on. Probably written as NES2, NES3 etc.. In fact, I'd probably actually just call this system the NES2 (regardless of the fact it's a portable). It's basically like the rebirth of what the NES started all those years ago (a gaming revolution), and combines the best of every single Nintendo home console AND handheld since, into one super—yet amazingly simple/elegant and easy to understand on the surface—portable (where Nintendo dominates anyway). NES2 would just ring SO true for me

PS. This is a system and solution where I don't think it would matter one sh*t how powerful Sony and Microsoft's next consoles are. They simply couldn't touch this concept imo, if they're just more of the same but with more power. If this system—the proper next-gen Nintendo PORTABLE basically (an area where it has utterly dominated for 26 years) but so much more too—wasn't lapped up by third parties out the gate then I doubt anything Nintendo could do would be a notable success at that point.