If it isn’t already, Instagram needs to be an integral channel within your social media/digital marketing strategy. With its number of users growing exponentially, it’s a platform you should really be utilising straight away. The channel has over 400 million active monthly users who are posting, on average, 40 BILLION images. That’s not to mention the 3.5 BILLION likes sent out over the course of a single day. The numbers are outstanding, and it’s definitely exciting times for many businesses out there that are making full use of the channel.

The engagement stats on the channel are like nothing we have ever seen before.

A study conducted by a Nate Elliot of Forrester shows the power Instagram has over its competitors in terms of engagement. His surveys found that engagement on Instagram was scored up to 60 times higher than it was on Facebook.

What does this look like in the real world? Here’s a popular example showing Red Bull’s social media channels. A year ago they released this snowboarding video on both their Facebook and Instagram channel.

Like anything Red Bull related, it got a fair few likes, but not as many as you may have expected.

Now before anyone jumps on the comments below, we all know that Facebook’s algorithm changes have affected the potential reach of posts sent out, but for a brand as big as Red Bull, who consistently send out interesting, engaging content, it shouldn’t be THAT much of a problem.

Right?

Wrong.

With over 46 million fans on Facebook, they only scraped together 2,600 likes on the post. Whereas over on Instagram, they racked up 36,000 likes on the exact same image with a following of just 1.2 million.

Instagram’s whole layout and format promotes an actively engaged culture that appreciates great photography and makes for great conversations. Facebook has seriously turned into a snorefest, comments are being filled with spam and completely unrelated memes. (See a recent LADbible post for a perfect example of this.)

Consumer engagement, I’d say, is THE most important factor when determining a brand’s success on social media. Your audience need to be talking about your brand, not just at your brand.

Here’s a quick graph showing the difference between Facebook, Twitter and Instagram for the first quarter of 2015.

Crazy right?

The Rule of 3 is nothing new, marketers from all over have been using the process since the early days of social media. It focuses on the conversation and ultimately builds the relationship you need with your audience in order to direct them right through your marketing/sales funnel.

It comprises three separate tactics that, when used together, form a winning strategy to start engaging with new audiences and growing your existing client base on Instagram. Growing social media channels isn’t hard. For years marketers years have been abusing the follow/unfollow tactic and surprisingly, it still works to a certain extent. The problem with follow/unfollow is that the audience you are building aren’t as targeted as the audience you could have.

So, What Is “The Golden Rule Of 3”?

The golden rule of 3 helps you build a follower base that is targeted, actively engaged on Instagram and is ultimately up for conversation.

Now as I mentioned earlier, these 3 tips aren’t completely fool proof, they aren’t 3 golden nuggets I’ve unearthed. Instead they are 3 simple, well known functions that when used consistently and to a high standard, can bring significant rewards, helping you get noticed and ultimately grow on Instagram.

So, here goes nothing…

1. Steal your competitors followers

Everyone knows how to follow people right? The question is, are you following the right people? A little tip I’ve picked up that helps me to follow an engaged and targeted community is to only follow influencers’ followers who have liked their most recent picture. Many accounts have spam followers, so you don’t want to be wasting time on bots that aren’t going to engage with your brand. With this approach, you’re only connecting with the users who are online, active and are engaging on Instagram at that time.

2. Don't just wait for the likes to roll in... like others' images too!

There’s hundreds if not thousands of brands on Instagram who are there to solely bleed the channel. They give nothing back to their followers other than the pictures they post. Instagram is about the mutual relationship you create when you follow one another – so get involved on the platform and start interacting with people by liking their posts.

3. Start the conversation instead of waiting for it to just happen

Comment on one of the user’s photos you have followed and liked. Commenting on a picture can show real interest and it’s a great way to get conversations going. As mentioned throughout, the engagement on Instagram is second to none, I would almost guarantee that if you leave a comment on a picture, of a user you have followed and liked, you will almost certainly receive a reply and a follow.

Now these 3 tips I’ve shared might not seem like anything special. But when you work them into a process and combine all three ALONGSIDE the great imagery you’re posting… it should work a treat.

As a quick overview, this formula almost guarantees a follow back. It sparks initial interest with the user by following them, it shows you’re active and interested in the content/imagery they’re offering and finally it shows you aren’t a bot as you can string together a conversation.

The Proof Is In the Pudding

This account is run by a good friend of mine; he travels all around the world to some spectacular places (very jealous). Instagram has given him the opportunity to share his incredible photos with the community he’s slowly built up over time.

He had a community of around 2,500 people who had all managed to come across his account completely organically while not engaging with anyone at all. But soon after implementing the rule of three, here’s what happened:

He started the technique in June this year and the stats show just how much it’s helped him grow in the months following! Now, I can’t take all the credit, as at some points through this he had press coverage from a handful of accounts, each with a decent following, but if you look closely on the graph, you can see the little spikes through the big spike where the “shout-outs” more than likely happened.

Another one of my good friends Ryan, a business development coach here at Ph. Creative, also runs a fashion and lifestyle blog in his spare time. The blog has always been popular on social media but it was only until recently that his engagement levels started to seriously improve as well as his conversions through the site. Check out his Instagram channel to see what I’m talking about, he has just over 30k followers and before using the golden rule of 3, he was getting barely any comments on his pictures. Now, using these tactics, the comments are increasing per picture and he is starting to have good conversations with his target audience. And we all know what good conversations lead to, don’t we?

Here's a graph showing the clear and gradual rise of engagement his account has found since implementing :

It’s a proven method, and it’s one that I strongly urge you to start doing too. Seriously, start right now! The whole point of SOCIAL media is to talk, share and engage with people, but there are so many people out there who simply don’t. Posting nice pictures and filling the comment box up with hashtags will only get you so far in terms of likes, but I can assure you, it won’t help you build that community you’re looking for. (Or should be looking for)

Now onto one of our clients. We started working on the Dulux Decorator centre part of the main Dulux brand a few months ago. The golden rule of 3 has worked well for them so far, and it looks like their account is going to only get bigger. We started the account from scratch, and unlike the other two examples I‘ve shown, it’s a lot more ‘niche’ in terms of its audience.

But the best thing about the golden rule of 3? You’re only targeting the people who you want to follow you! The key thing to remember is that it’s never about how many people are following you, it’s about who is following you.

That’s the beauty of the technique; you are slowly building up a following of targeted users who are active and ready to engage. Yes you could buy followers as social proof and get the account to slowly snowball; but who wants 5,000 empty bots on their account, literally doing nothing? It may make your account seem like its doing well at first glance, but they will soon tell when you are scraping together a few likes on each picture with your 5003 followers…

I have tested pretty much every method I have found that helps or claims to help when building an account, and I can tell you with 100% confidence that engaging with your audience is the only way to do it. I know it sounds simple and very obvious, but people just aren’t doing it. There are brands online who don’t interact with their audience whatsoever. It’s astonishing.

So that’s it. I’ve told you my secret and I hope you really do listen and utilise it. I’m sick to death of hearing people in this industry use the phrase “Marketers ruin everything”. Why? Why do we have to ruin everything? Let’s actually use a platform well, engage with our audience all while ensuring we aren’t flooding the channel with jargon and sales messages. Let’s connect with our audience on an emotional level, create stimulating conversations and communities and respect it as a whole.

I really think we can pave the way for marketing on Instagram without ruining the platform. But we need everyone to get on board. It’s an opportunity sitting there ready for you to get involved.

Finally, the majority of my blogs do have some kind of purpose... (sometimes). The purpose of this blog is to help improve and ensure the instagram community isnt ruined. I genuinely want to help keep this channel secure, its clearly a valuabe channel.

So, here's my offer, I will audit your Instagram profile(s) at absolutely no cost at all. My audit will include tips, recommendations, content ideas and possibly even a few influencers who you can leverage to help grow and connect with new communities. Send me over an email to [email protected] with your Instagram username and i'll get cracking on it

Thanks for reading, if there’s anything I’ve mentioned that you aren’t quite sure of, or anything that you don’t think is correct, don’t hesitate to tell me in the comments below or tweet me @PhCreativeRob. Maybe we can get a conversation going...