Ready to put your 4K filmmaking to the test? Well, now that Sharp has launched the world's first THX Certified 4K Ultra HD TV, they're partnering with THX and RED to enlist filmmakers to compete in their 4K Film Competition "The Art of Amazing." If you're looking to get your 4K work out there, read on to find out the details on how to enter, submission requirements, as well as information on prizes.

Sharp is seeking short 4K films that are 4 minutes or less. Given the name of the competition, these films should capture something "amazing" using concepts like "energy, light, and scale.” Sharp defines amazing as, "the impeccable interaction of energy, light and scale. It's full of dynamic, precisely directed energy. It glows with crisp, radiantly bold light. Its scale is larger than life, its proportions exact.”

That leaves the door open to all sorts of films, be them narrative, technical, abstract, experimental -- essentially anything that you think will amaze the judges and the voters. Also, obviously, it must be filmed in 4K.

Four finalists will be selected on November 14th by a panel of judges represented by Sharp, THX and RED. These finalists' films will then be voted on by fans from November 14th through December 4th by "liking" Sharp's Facebook page and choosing which film they like best. The video with the most votes will be the winner. Submissions will be judged based on their creativity, technical quality and the use of required elements.

Now, on to prizes. The four finalists will receive a trip to Hollywood for the Shot on Red Film Festival (December 4th and 5th.) The winner will receive one of Sharp's 70” Class AQUOS® 4K Ultra HD LED TVs ($7,499.99,) as well as a trip to CES 2014 from January 7th to January 10th in Las Vegas. Their film will play live in the Sharp booth, which might give the winner's film a chance for exposure.

A couple of stipulations to keep in mind are:

The contest is open only to legal U.S. residents that are 18 years or older.

Your film must be original, but could have been submitted in other competitions.

Submitting your film grants Sharp and its distribution partners to use stills and video content for promotional purposes.

You can enter multiple films.

For more info on requirements and guidelines, make sure to read the submission form carefully.

To enter, first "like" "The Art of Amazing" Facebook page, which gains you access to the submission form. Once you're done filling out the form, you can email it to 4KFilmCompetition@SharpUSA.com. Be sure to put your film on a USB 3.0 hard drive or flash drive and mail it to the address given in the submission form. All submissions must be received by November 8th, 2013.

What do you think? Does this sound like a competition you'd like to enter? Have you heard of some other 4K only competitions? Let us know in the comments.

Links:

[via Indiewire]