Hypnotherapy cured me of my Asda cake obsession: Supermarket worker loses four stone after curbing birthday cake binges





A supermarket worker has shed more than four stone after conquering his bizarre addiction to eating birthday cakes.

Sweet-toothed Asda employee Adam Williams, 29, ballooned to 15 stone after bingeing on the sweet treats which he bought from work every day for a year.



Office worker Adam would take home the mammoth cakes - intended to feed 40 people - when their prices were knocked down after they had passed their sell-by date.

Scroll down for video



Adam Williams cured his addiction to birthday cakes through hypnotherapy and has since lost four stone



His addiction saw him wolfing down the family-size confections on a daily basis and he would even suffer migraines if he didn't get his fix.



After piling on the pounds desperate Adam turned to hypnotherapy in a last-ditch attempt to stop his overeating.



The treatment was a success and now Adam, from Coventry in the West Midlands, has managed to lose an impressive four stone.

Asda worker Adam used to buy family size birthday cakes at knock down prices after they had gone past their sell-by date

The cakes were baked to serve up to 40 people and Adam's addiction saw him wolfing them down every day

Adam, who lives with his girlfriend Chardelle, 29, said: 'I've never been slim, I've always carried some weight.



' But there came a point when I started eating fast food every day. Then the cakes started coming as well and I piled on the pounds without noticing it.



'It was only when I looked at the pictures that I realised how much weight I was carrying.



'These cakes just became part of my routine, I would eat them like someone else would eat breakfast.



'After a little while I wasn't even eating them because I really enjoyed them, it was just what I did - I ate cake.

The 29-year-old began to suffer migraines if he didn't eat cakes every day



'These cakes were meant to feed about 40 people and me and my girlfriend would finish one off, but she wouldn't have much and I polished off the rest of the cake.



'It wasn't even the cake itself that got me hooked. I just loved the sugary icing and the rest of the cake was a bonus.



'If we ever had more than one stored I would just eat them all. They were so cheap from work I kept buying them.



'I started to suffer some pretty severe migraines and I guess that was because of all the sugar, if it was withdrawn from my body I felt horrible.



'Then I went to see hypnotherapist David Kilmurry as a desperate attempt to lose the weight as nothing else had worked.



'They were really good and after a session I immediately found myself drinking more water and just naturally eating less.



'Now I have much more enthusiasm for everything, whereas before I was lazy and stopped caring.'





VIDEO In his own words: Adam talks about his cake a day habit

Adam turned to hypnotherapy to stop his overeating and is now back to his old weight after giving up cakes like these



