Adeel Khan found guilty of murder over Rozelle shop fire

Updated

Sydney shopkeeper Adeel Khan has been found guilty of murdering a man who lived above his convenience store in 2014.

On its fifth day of deliberations, the NSW Supreme Court jury accepted that 46-year-old Khan killed Chris Noble when he deliberately set fire to his Rozelle shop.

The jury is yet to reach a verdict on the deaths of Bianka O'Brien and her baby son Jude, who lived in a separate neighbouring unit.

Khan had pleaded not guilty to three murder charges.

It was alleged Khan planned to destroy the shop by fire because business was bad and he wanted to get out of his lease, and also because he wanted to draw on an insurance policy.

Prosecutors said Mr Khan placed up to 10 plastic containers of fuel around the shop and laid fuel-soaked cloth trailers between them.

It was alleged Khan lit one of those trailers under the back door and the force of the massive explosion, leaving him trapped beneath a large fridge.

Khan admitted he bought fuel that he pumped into containers at a service station for his car, but denied lighting a fire.

Instead, he claimed armed robbers tied him up and blindfolded him on the night of the blast, and he did not know who lit the fire, but one of the intruders had threatened to do so.

The court heard Khan knew Mr Noble and two other men were living in the unit directly above his shop and there were people living in the unit above the adjoining mobile phone store.

The husband of Ms O'Brien, John O'Brien, said Khan knew his young family lived upstairs and the shop owner would often enquire about his son.

The jury will continue their deliberations next week.

Supreme Court Judge Justice Elizabeth Fullerton told the jury not to discuss their deliberations and not to read the press.

"Can I suggest that you just read something else?" she said.

"Do not be drawn into discussions with your friends and family.

"You've got a long weekend ahead of you. Put these things out of your mind."

Topics: murder-and-manslaughter, crime, law-crime-and-justice, courts-and-trials, rozelle-2039, sydney-2000

First posted