The band opened their first show of 2013 with the new number

Arctic Monkeys played a brand new song called ‘Do I Wanna Know?’ at their first live show in almost a year, which took place at the Majestic Ventura Theater in Ventura, California last night (May 22).

The band opened their set with the slow-burning new track. Click above to watch fan-shot footage of the performance. Sporting a silver tuxedo jacket, Alex Turner then led the band through a run of classic tracks from throughout their career. The show marked the band’s return to the live stage, as it was the first time they’ve performed in public since appearing at the Olympic Games Opening Ceremony in July of last year after finishing up the ‘Suck It And See’ tour, which ended at Metallica’s Orion Music + More festival in June 2012.

“How are you feeling tonight Ventura?,” asked Alex Turner after playing ‘Brick By Brick’. “Are you in a good mood would you say? Can you feel the sense of occasion?” The rowdy, sold-out crowd responded with cheers. Turner went on to introduce ‘Old Yellow Bricks’ by saying: “We haven’t played this one for a long, long time Ventura, but it’s gonna be great.” After the ‘Favourite Worst Nightmare’ album track he added: “Well, we’re fucking playing all the deep cuts here in Ventura, eh?”

The band, who play Sasquatch Festival in Washington on Friday (May 24) will play six more US dates before starting their run of European festival dates, which includes a headline set at Glastonbury Festival on June 28.

The band are expected to release their fifth album later this year.

Arctic Monkeys played:

‘Do I Wanna Know?’

‘R U Mine?’

‘Dancing Shoes’

‘Brianstorm’

‘Brick By Brick’

‘Don’t Sit Down ‘Cause I’ve Moved Your Chair’

‘Evil Twin’

‘Old Yellow Bricks’

‘The Hellcat Spangled Shalalala’

‘Crying Lightning’

‘Pretty Visitors’

‘Do Me A Favour’

‘Cornerstone’

‘She’s Thunderstorms’

‘The View From The Afternoon’

‘Fake Tales Of San Francisco’

‘I Bet You Look Good On The Dancefloor’

‘That’s Where You’re Wrong’

‘Suck It And See’

‘Fluorescent Adolescent’

‘505’