Get the biggest politics stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Wikileaks founder Julian Assange has accused Hillary Clinton of being "hysterical" about Russia with a "kind of neo-McCarthyist" politics.

Speaking to Fox News via video-link from the Ecuadorian embassy in London, Assange said: "She has palled up with the neo-cons responsible for the Iraq war and she has grabbed onto a kind of neo-McCarthy hysteria about Russia and is using this to demonise the Trump campaign."

The Democratic presidential candidate accused Donald Trump at her latest rally in Reno, Nevada yesterday of having links to Vladimir Putin.

(Image: Getty)

She referred to the Russian leader as the “grand godfather of this global brand of extreme nationalism" and said “Trump himself heaps praise on Putin and embraces pro-Russian policies".

Assange has not officially endorsed the trump campaign but said it has no links to Russian agents.

Wikileaks made around 20,000 Democratic National Committee email public last month, which appeared to reveals that top politicians attempted to derail the Bernie Sanders' nomination.

(Image: Getty)

Clinton alleged that Russia was behind the DNC hack but hasn't provided evidence to back up her claims.

Assage has been holed-up in the embassy for four years, under constant police surveillance, after being granted asylum after Sweden called for him to be extradited over historic sexual assault claims.

He is wanted for questioning over allegations against two women in 2010 - which he has always denied.

(Image: Reuters)

However, he claims if he travels to Sweden the American government will secure his extradition over espionage charges related to his work for Wikileaks.

In February, a UN panel ruled that Assange has been “arbitrarily detained” in the Ecuadorian embassy in London.

Earlier this month he offered to be questioned inside the embassy but the Swedish prosecutors only recently agreed.