Vincent Kompany will miss the start of Pep Guardiola’s reign as Manchester City manager after being ruled out for four months following groin and thigh surgery.

The City captain flew to Barcelona on Thursday for an operation after limping out of the club’s Champions League semi-final defeat against Real Madrid after just six minutes 24 hours earlier.

Despite initial optimism that the 30-year-old would be fit in time to take part in Belgium’s Euro 2016 campaign, Kompany issued a statement on his Facebook page in Saturday evening to confirm that he would miss the tournament in France.

Join Independent Minds For exclusive articles, events and an advertising-free read for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month Get the best of The Independent With an Independent Minds subscription for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month Get the best of The Independent Without the ads – for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month

And Belgian national team physiotherapist Lieven Maesschalck has now revealed that the full extent of the injury means that Kompany will be sidelined until September.

“Vincent Kompany is out for 4 months,” Maesschalck said. “But he will come back."

Shape Created with Sketch. Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Show all 21 left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch. Shape Created with Sketch. Leicester City celebrate Premier League title 1/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title The Premier League trophy arrives at the King Power Stadium. Getty 2/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans joke with an image of Gary Lineker after his promise to present Match of the Day in his pants. Getty 3/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title A Leicester-decorated Rolls Royce arrives for Leicester vs Everton. Getty 4/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans begin to arrive ahead of the match. Getty 5/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans begin to arrive ahead of the match. Getty 6/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title A Leicester fan takes a swipe at the clubs spending more money in the Premier League. Getty 7/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Another Leicester fan calls for Lineker to deliver on his promise. Getty 8/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Leicester fans celebrate ahead of the match with Everton. Getty 9/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Opera singer Andrea Bocelli appears on stage to sing ahead of the match. Getty 10/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Jamie Vardy celebrates after scoring the opening goal inside five minutes. Getty 11/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Andy King celebrates after making it 2-0. This content is subject to copyright. 12/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Claudio Ranieri watches the action unfold. This content is subject to copyright. 13/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Jamie Vardy smashes home his second from the penalty spot... 2016 Getty Images 14/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title ... and celebrates in front of Everton goalkeeper Joel Robles. 2016 Getty Images 15/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Vardy celebrates after making it 3-0 - he would later miss another penalty to miss the chance of getting a hat-trick This content is subject to copyright. 16/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans in Thailand watch the action. This content is subject to copyright. 17/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title More fans in Bangkok. This content is subject to copyright. 18/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Leicester captain Wes Morgan finally lifts the trophy alongside Claudio Ranieri. 2016 Getty Images 19/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Morgan and Ranieri. Getty 20/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Ranieri lifts his first ever League title. 2016 Getty Images 21/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Leicester City owner Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha celebrates with the players and staff. 2016 Getty Images 1/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title The Premier League trophy arrives at the King Power Stadium. Getty 2/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans joke with an image of Gary Lineker after his promise to present Match of the Day in his pants. Getty 3/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title A Leicester-decorated Rolls Royce arrives for Leicester vs Everton. Getty 4/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans begin to arrive ahead of the match. Getty 5/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans begin to arrive ahead of the match. Getty 6/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title A Leicester fan takes a swipe at the clubs spending more money in the Premier League. Getty 7/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Another Leicester fan calls for Lineker to deliver on his promise. Getty 8/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Leicester fans celebrate ahead of the match with Everton. Getty 9/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Opera singer Andrea Bocelli appears on stage to sing ahead of the match. Getty 10/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Jamie Vardy celebrates after scoring the opening goal inside five minutes. Getty 11/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Andy King celebrates after making it 2-0. This content is subject to copyright. 12/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Claudio Ranieri watches the action unfold. This content is subject to copyright. 13/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Jamie Vardy smashes home his second from the penalty spot... 2016 Getty Images 14/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title ... and celebrates in front of Everton goalkeeper Joel Robles. 2016 Getty Images 15/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Vardy celebrates after making it 3-0 - he would later miss another penalty to miss the chance of getting a hat-trick This content is subject to copyright. 16/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Fans in Thailand watch the action. This content is subject to copyright. 17/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title More fans in Bangkok. This content is subject to copyright. 18/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Leicester captain Wes Morgan finally lifts the trophy alongside Claudio Ranieri. 2016 Getty Images 19/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Morgan and Ranieri. Getty 20/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Ranieri lifts his first ever League title. 2016 Getty Images 21/21 Leicester City celebrate Premier League title Leicester City owner Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha celebrates with the players and staff. 2016 Getty Images

Kompany, who has suffered a series of muscle injuries in recent months, had only just returned from a lengthy calf injury ahead of the Real clash.

But with the centre-half understood to have suffered a torn thigh as well damage to the groin in his right leg, Kompany now faces a lengthy period of rehabilitation over the summer.

His lay-off means that incoming manager Guardiola will be forced to plan for life without Kompany for the first month of the 2016-17 campaign.

And the severity of Kompany’s injury now increases the likelihood of City pursuing defensive targets John Stones and Aymeric Laporte this summer.

Keep up to date with all the latest news with expert comment and analysis from our award-winning writers