Sep 3, 2014; Minneapolis, MN, USA; Chicago White Sox right fielder Avisail Garcia (26) hits a double in the first inning against the Minnesota Twins at Target Field. Mandatory Credit: Jesse Johnson-USA TODAY Sports

When Avisail Garcia was diagnosed with a torn labrum in April, the White Sox organization and its fans lamented his loss to, what was presumed to be, season-ending surgery. Five months later, with the help of an accelerated recovery, Garcia is back on the field, gaining valuable playing time and experience before the season ends.

Avisail was recalled from his rehab assignment in Charlotte with the Knights and made his return to the White Sox on August 16th, in Chicago against the Blue Jays. He greeted the home crowd by going 2 for 4 with a double and an RBI. However, things didn’t continue to go that well for the next couple weeks.

Over the course of 51 at bats during his first fourteen games back in the lineup, Garcia hit .196 with a .218 on-base percentage, according to Fangraphs.com. Most concerning were Garcia’s 19 strikeouts and only 2 base on balls.

Concerning Garcia’s slow start, Ventura wisely noted in comments to CSN Chicago that, “Once he settles in you’ll see a better idea of what you’re going to get in the future.”

Robin also eluded to the fact that Garcia’s hot start in Charlotte, and his first game back with the Sox, were likely the result of a “shot of adrenaline” from being back on the field in live competition, rather than an indication of his comfort level physically.

TURNING A CORNER

Thankfully, these past couple weeks have been quite a different story than his first two since being recalled. Avisail looks to have found his comfort zone and is showing fans why the organization landed him in a three-way trade last season.

Since August 31st, Garcia is hitting .321 with a .393 on-base percentage. Just as encouraging is the fact he has lowered his K/BB ratio, striking out 10 times compared to 7 base on balls. He also has 9 RBI in that span. Of course, Garcia does play some defense too, and it helps to have an arm like his in the outfield.

Your browser does not support iframes.

Watching the 23 year-old Garcia return to form and progress alongside Adam Eaton and Rookie of the Year candidate, Jose Abreu, White Sox fans and the organization have plenty to look forward to in 2015.

NOTES