Planned Parenthood’s political arm is hailing the Senate’s newly reached deal on the anti-trafficking bill as a win for abortion-rights supporters.

Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood Action Fund, praised Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid Harry Mason ReidBottom Line Brennan fires back at 'selfish' Trump over Harry Reid criticism Trump rips Harry Reid for 'failed career' after ex-Dem leader slams him in interview MORE (D-Nev.) and Sen. Patty Murray Patricia (Patty) Lynn MurrayThis week: Congress, Trump set for showdown on emergency declaration Senate reignites blue slip war over Trump court picks Johnson & Johnson subpoenaed by DOJ and SEC, company says MORE (D-Wash.) for not standing down in the weeks-long fight over the bill’s abortion language.

“Thankfully, Senators Reid and Murray and other women’s health champions held the line,” she wrote in a statement Tuesday.

The anti-trafficking bill — authored by Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn John CornynHillicon Valley: Senators urge Trump to bar Huawei products from electric grid | Ex-security officials condemn Trump emergency declaration | New malicious cyber tool found | Facebook faces questions on treatment of moderators Key senators say administration should ban Huawei tech in US electric grid Senate plots to avoid fall shutdown brawl MORE (R-Texas) — had been stalled since early 2015 because many Democrats objected to an expansion of the so-called Hyde Amendment, which prohibits federal funding for abortion.

Cornyn and Murray announced a deal Tuesday after weeks of negotiations.

Under the compromise, the human trafficking bill does not provide any funding for victims of sex crimes to obtain abortions, but it does not expand the Hyde Amendment to prohibit funds gathered from criminal fines from being used for abortion services.

Planned Parenthood Action Fund and Democratic leaders have blamed Senate Republicans for the bill’s holdup, which also caused a delay on confirming President Obama’s attorney general nominee.

“What’s clear is that this is part of an organized, orchestrated effort to block access to abortion for the most vulnerable women in this country,” the group wrote.

Planned Parenthood Action Fund has already ran several ad campaigns slamming GOP senators for the bill’s holdup.

Susan B. Anthony’s List, one of the country’s biggest anti-abortion groups, also supports the deal.

But the group again blasted “pro-abortion politicians” for blocking the measure for so long.

“This entire incident has revealed what pro-lifers have long known to be the case: the Democratic Party is entirely beholden to the abortion industry," the group’s president, Marjorie Dannenfelser, wrote in a statement.

"Senator Reid was willing to throw trafficking victims under the bus at the request of the abortion industry," she wrote.