Despite predictions of gloom and doom, the province posted a surplus last year of more than $1 billion, no matter how it’s counted.

The previous Tory government initially forecast a $514-million surplus last year, but when oil prices plummeted last fall, premier Jim Prentice warned Alberta could end up in the red.

The 2014-15 consolidated surplus of $1.1 billion ends of string of six consecutive deficits and boosts the province’s contingency fund to $8.2 billion — a reserve Finance Minister Joe Ceci says will come in handy in dealing with the drop in non-renewable resource revenue.

“Going forward the climate — the economy today — is very different from what it was then,” he told reporters at the legislature Tuesday as the NDP government released the final year-end numbers.

But Ceci said he was reluctant to use the cash savings to fill the projected revenue void.

“If we can find a way to achieve greater revenue stability without the use of the contingency account — though it’s probably not possible — that would be my first desire,” said the Calgary MLA.

“Philosophically, I think contingencies are there to smooth things out. They’re not there to totally drain the bank account.”

Although the price of oil has stayed below $60 US per barrel for much of this year, Ceci said he hoped new corporate tax increases and hikes in personal income tax for the wealthiest Albertans will meet some of the projected shortfall.

He also mused about other “revenue measures,” but would not elaborate.

During the spring election, the NDP campaigned on a budget with a projected $5.4-billion deficit — $400-million more red ink than was forecast in the PC budget for 2015-16 that was released in March.

The final Tory budget, however, was never passed as the Prentice government called an early election, which it lost to Rachel Notley’s NDP.

PC interim Leader Ric McIver said the fact the province recorded a hefty surplus during a period of falling oil prices proves the former government was fiscally prudent and left the province in strong economic shape.

“The government did control expenditures last year because it was the right thing to do,” said McIver, former labour minister in the Prentice government.

“This annual report is a good sign post to go look at what good shape Alberta is in overall.”

But Wildrose finance critic Derek Fildebrandt said the report doesn’t reflect the deteriorating state of Alberta’s finances because it relies on the same accounting methods that were employed by the former PC government.

The Wildrose MLA said the provincial government paid out more than $780 million to finance interest payments on debt last year, and Alberta remains on pace to top $30 billion in debt by 2019.

“When you collect record revenues and still have to take out billions in debt, the real problem is overspending,” Fildebrandt said in a statement.

“The NDP plan of raising spending faster than they can raise taxes just isn’t sustainable.”

Ceci would not comment on the size of the projected deficit for the current fiscal year, which began April 1. The NDP don’t plan to table their own budget until October.

Alberta Finance officials say higher-than-expected revenues from taxes and investments in the first six months of last year offset the impact of lower oil prices in the fall.

Although bitumen royalties fell $530 million, the province still brought in $8.9 billion in non-renewable resource revenue.

The Heritage Savings Trust Fund was reported to be $17.9 billion. Total capital debt climbed to $11.9 billion.

The PC government reported a $755-million surplus in 2013-14, but under its new consolidated reporting, that surplus was actually a $302-million deficit. The new reporting method now includes revenue, expenses, assets and liabilities from schools, universities, colleges and health facilities as well as pension liabilities.

Under the previous financial reporting method, which was criticized by opposition parties and the provincial auditor general, the surplus in 2014-15 would have been reported as $1.4 billion.

dhenton@calgaryherald.com