Mar 8, 2015; Newark, NJ, USA; New Jersey Devils goalie Martin Brodeur (30) is honored as part of the 20th Anniversary of the 1995 Stanley Cup championship team before the game between the New Jersey Devils and the Philadelphia Flyers at Prudential Center. Mandatory Credit: Ed Mulholland-USA TODAY Sports

Kevin Weekes released this article today on NHL.com regarding the release of 6 stamps by Canada Post that will feature six great Canadian NHL goalies of the past.



We’re going to take a stab at guessing at least four of the six. We’ve been given some hints that should make figuring this out a little easier. Let’s see if we can fill out the entire six slots.

“Only a few goaltenders can be considered to be among the best of the best.” “Hundreds of goalies have laced up the skates, put on the mask, pads and blocker, and had the courage to get in front of the net with pucks coming right at them, with the shots sometimes topping 100 mph. Equipment or not, that’s no easy feat and isn’t cut out for everyone.” “Not only did each elite goalie make an impression, each left a legacy. Our game is so much better for them having played it. Each has raised the standard and helped change the perception about not only how critical but also how dominant goalies can be in the NHL.” “Each of these goalies left his stamp on the game. Now six Canadian goalies will be honored in a collection of Great Canadian Goalie stamps, which debuts Oct. 1.” “While I can’t tell you who the six will be, I’ll say this: Five of the six are in the Hall of Fame, four have won the Calder Trophy, and each has won the Stanley Cup (a combined 20 times). Not to mention two have won the Conn Smythe Trophy. That’s pretty impressive, so clearly each is deserving of the honor.” “The confidence that each of these men gave their respective teammates, coaches and fans while taking it away from the opposition is immeasurable. They were game-changers. They were Game Savers.”

Well time for speculation folks as I dig through some old records and awards to see if we can’t identify who the six Canadian legend NHL goalies are. We know 5 of them are hall of famers, with 4 of them being Calder trophy winners. That makes things a little easier.

Going from most recent to oldest Canadian goalies to win the Calder. 08-09 saw Steve Mason win it. Obviously too young to be considered and things got a little rocky after his rookie season.

03-04 saw Andrew Raycroft win it, but it’s definitely not going to be that bust of a goalie.

The first guaranteed is the 93-94 Calder winner Martin Brodeur, future hall of famer and Stanley Cup winner. There’s an easy one.

Another guy who might be featured is 90-91 Calder Trophy winner Ed Belfour who had a lengthy successful career.

Here’s another no brainer. The 71-72 Calder Trophy winner Ken Dryden is an absolute legend amongst goaltenders in NHL history. You can probably pencil his name in.

Another Canadian hall-of-famer who is another NHL goalie legend won his Calder Trophy is 69-70. Tony Esposito had a great NHL career.

Going back a little further, the 55-56 Calder Trophy winner Glenn Hall went on to win 3 Vezina Trophies during his career with 1 Stanley Cup coming in 1961.

Delving back even further, how about 52-53 Calder Trophy winner Gump Worsley? He went on to win 4 Stanley Cups with the Montreal Canadiens.

Lastly in 50-51 legend Terry Sawchuk won the Calder Trophy, and also went on to win 4 Stanley Cups.

Now we know only four of the six being featured on these stamps were Calder Trophy winners. So which four of the above do you think are going to be featured by Canada Post?