A Royal Marine taking part in a selection process for the SAS died after he fell down a gorge which he did not realise was there because it was marked on a map in Welsh.

An inquest into the death of 25-year-old marine Ashley Hicks, heard that he plunged more than 100ft down a steep gorge, in the dark, near Trawsfynydd in Snowdonia in October 2012 during an "escape and evasion" exercise.

Later the same night a second soldier suffered a broken leg after falling 30ft on to a ledge in the same gorge.

The coroner said the marine's death was avoidable as she recorded a verdict of accidental death.

"Had the gorge been identified in the recce procedure it would have been out of bounds and he wouldn't have been there," Nicola Jones, the coroner said.

She added: "Crucially there will be more attempts to gain local specialist knowledge of unacceptable hazards on training grounds.

"The failure to identify this gorge as an unduly hazardous location is clearly the most significant contributing factor to Ashley slipping and falling."

The coroner said the word "ceunant" (gorge) appeared on the planning map and asked why no one had identified it, as it was the local language.

"It's unlikely they would obtain translation of the words. We tend to operate in symbology," Soldier AA, the assistant chief of staff at the Ministry of Defence responsible for specialist units, told the inquest.

A service inquiry had been carried out following the incidentand Soldier AA was one of three panel members. The panel felt the planning and reconnaissance of the area was not as comprehensive as it could have been.

He told the hearing that Google maps were now used "to try to fly the terrain."

He added :"We are quite proud of our map-reading ability. On this occasion that ability wasn't good enough to prevent the non-identification of this hazard. We have taken steps to make sure that doesn't happen again. One of these steps is to take advice."

He added :"We now know what 'gorge' in Welsh looks like."

Another officer, known as 'Soldier R' and in charge of selecting new recruits said :"We can't eliminate all risk." He said in a statement that procedures had been reviewed.

"Escape, evasion and survival are inherent skills a soldier must demonstrate to join this specialist unit," he added.

Around 250 students took part in each course and the inquest heard the pass rate was between nine and 13 per cent.

Marine Hicks, of Solihull, was in the top ten of students. The exercise scenario was that soldiers had been in a helicopter downed in hostile territory. A "hunter" force of 100 "enemy" soldiers were seeking them.

Soldier R said:"He was a good candidate for whom we had the highest expectations. We would expect rather than hope someone of Ashley's quality would pass the course."